DANNY: The tricky thing about covering
classic games is that oftentimes it can
be quite difficult to get
developers to come out of the dark.
But interestingly enough, that wasn't so 
much of a problem with this one.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When the patrons voted for Thief for 
our second episode of Greatest Hits,
I was filled with both
excitement and sheer terror.
Thief is one of the most
beloved PC games of all time,
and there's a lot to dive into when
it comes to its design and influence.
But it's also impossible to talk about
Thief without also exploring the infamous
team that created it.
Boston's Looking Glass Studios has an
almost mythological place in the history of
video games, a time and place where some of
 the most important PC games of all time
were created, and a spawning pool for a 
whole generation of influential creatives.
It's due to this infamy that Looking
Glass Studios has been covered in
retrospectives for decades. And there's
a healthy community of archivists
who've saved everything from lost
content to the final day of the studio.
But as with any good myth,
there are aspects of this story that are
more fantasy than fiction, rough edges
that have been shaved off, unsung heroes
who never got their day in the sun,
and the reality of the human
cost of creating great art.
Over the past three months, I've interviewed
 dozens of people who worked
at Looking Glass. Some off the record, some 
via email, others over Zoom and Discord,
all to try and paint as accurate a picture
as possible of the work that went on there.
We have a lot to cover, from the design
of the first three games, to the closing
of Looking Glass, the stealth
genre mechanics the team invented,
and the ones that didn't stick,
how the series shifted to Austin,
the culture of both studios, and so much more.
So grab your blackjack and get your
 water arrows nice and wet.
We have a lot of taffers to talk to.
KEN LEVINE: Danny, I want to tell you ahead of time...
DANNY: Sure.
KEN: It was a long time ago.
DANNY: Yeah.
KEN: I have a fairly good memory of the 
high level, but some of the details
are really, really vague.
- Totally, I appreciate it. that's why we're 
sort of interviewing 10 people instead of two,
because the further back you go, you know, 
the more labor you put on your interviewee
to recall things that are, you know, 
just too far away, lifetimes ago.
- 23 years ago or something.
- It's a lifetime.
- One thing that was amazing about
Looking Glass was there was a lot of,
it was a lot of MIT grads
and they really came from,
if you read the book Hackers, they
described sort of the, the founding
of the hacker community at MIT in
the late 1950s, early 60s,
and the first sort of game development
coming out of that group of hackers who
really had a hacker's ethos. They weren't 
really money driven. They were really
making cool, cool stuff driven. And there was 
a ton of guys at Looking Glass,
Tim Stellmach and Marc LeBlanc and Doug
Church, who were, who had that ethos.
And it really formed the heart of the 
company. And I think it really led to their
great sense of experimentation. The job I 
was at, I got offered like a partnership
at it, at a computer consulting firm on Wall 
Street to stay. And it wasn't even a question.
I took like a half salary cut, 
and I basically just moved up there.
Would be there every single day
like till like two in the morning.
'Cause I just wanted to learn. I just
wanted to be around game people.
I didn't even know any game people. 
Like I didn't know gamers at this point.
Gaming was not what it is now.
So I suddenly found this group of
people who was just brilliant,
and I can learn so much from
them, and they all love games.
And so it was like heaven. It was heaven.
DANNY: Ken Levine, like so many of the 
Looking Glass alumni, has gone on to have a
remarkable career, co-founding Irrational 
Games, creators of System Shock 2,
Freedom Force, and the Bioshock franchise. 
In fact, it was while working at Looking Glass's
canceled Star Trek Voyager game that he 
and his fellow co-founders originally met.
Ken had been a struggling screenwriter
in Los Angeles for a few years,
a young award winning writer who was
set to go on to do incredible things
until he simply didn't. Like so many
young people who made their way west,
his career had gone nowhere, and
struggling with creative purpose,
he found himself working at a
software company to make ends meet.
So when the opportunity to head up to
Boston and joined the studio that had made
some of his favorite games 
appeared, he didn't think twice.
After that Voyager game was canned,
 Ken was asked to create concepts
for a brand new game, any ideas 
that came to his mind.
Many of them never got further than
his notepad and a few conversations.
One or two got a little bit
further before being scrapped.
And one of them would lay the
foundations of a PC gaming classic.
No matter the story though, Ken made
sure they all had memorable titles.
KEN: There was one called Split Knuckle, 
which was like a martial arts fighting game,
but heavily inspired by like 
Big Trouble in Little China. It was like,
it was very, it was very strange 
and very weird, but fun.
Then there was Dark Elves Must Die, 
which really about a world where
the dark elves had gotten a bad rap, and they
 were discriminated against in this world.
And you were a dark elf.
And then there was Better Red Than Undead.
 No, Better Dead Than--
Wait, was it Better Red than Undead or Better...
But basically it was a 1950s like Cold War 
spy story, where somehow the Russian,
the cut lead of the Soviets had 
made an army of undead.
And then there was School of Mages,
which involved you being able to draw.
This never would have worked,
but draw, like use your mouse to draw 
the shapes of magic spells.
- Wow, like Arx Fatalis kind of did something.
- Yeah, I think they ended up 
doing something like that.
DANNY: Ken would pitch these games to 
Doug Church, an MIT grad who had been
instrumental in the design of games like
Ultima Underworld and System Shock.
Doug would warm to some of these ideas 
and then reject them after deeper thought,
sending Ken back to the writer's
room with a new blank page.
- A very frustrating but a very educational
 process for me, because then
I'd have to pick myself up the 
next day, and go back into work,
and basically put the thing I was super
excited about aside basically forever,
and then come up with something new.
But I found I could always go back the next day, 
and I could dig in and find something new.
So the next one I got excited about
was something called Dark Camelot,
another inversion story where Merlin and 
Arthur were actually the villains,
and you were playing Mordred. And if you 
know the sort of, the Arthur ethos,
Mordred and Morgana were 
the villains in that story,
but they were the heroes in this story.
Morgana was, instead of being like a sort of,
you know, a European style witch, she was 
from Africa. You two were made into
the villains in that world, 
but you were actually the heroes.
I guess I was called to these stories where 
you were sort of unfairly labeled the villain
and became the hero.
DANNY: Dark Camelot stuck around 
longer than many of Ken's ideas.
Looking Glass's artist, Rob Waters, 
developed concept art for the game,
attempting to visualize the
world Ken had described.
But when they started to make a control
scheme that simulated sword fighting,
it caused them trouble.
They had rudimentary sword
fighting in Ultima Underworld,
but it didn't have the required precision
or player feedback that would make
using it immersive. According to
storied game developer Warren Spector,
this was one of several problems
the project suffered from.
- So when I started, it was, it was 
Dark Camelot. And I remember, you know,
reading the documentation there and 
thinking the team really didn't know
what game they wanted to make.
Beyond the fiction, it really
didn't make a whole lot of sense.
Doug Church and some other
folks were kind of leading the
design charge while also writing a bunch 
of code and working way too hard.
And so it started making this 
turn to more of a stealth game.
You know, it was kind of a reaction to all the
 fast paced first-person shooters at the time
and a desire to move away from that 
and offer some unique gameplay.
It really came together when Greg LoPiccolo 
moved from audio exclusively
to being the project lead.  It kind of bounced 
around, and people tried to decide
what game they were trying to make. 
And it was this big democratic team effort,
and they needed someone to push them. 
And Greg did a great job on that.
I saw that that whole transition from, you know, 
thinking Better Red than Undead
was one of the wackier proposals I'd ever seen, 
to Dark Camelot with a team that
didn't know what game they wanted 
to make, to what became Thief
finally under Greg's direction.
DANNY: Warren and Ken are often 
associated with Thief, but their influence
over the project was less direct than most.
 Warren had been hired by
Looking Glass founder Paul Neurath 
to start a studio in Austin, Texas,
a city he had lived in for some time 
while working at Origin Systems
on the Ultima Franchise. Warren's role was to
be executive producer for all RPGs.
And while he shepherded the Thief
project through its early days,
the financial insecurity of Looking
Glass eventually caused him to close the
Austin office to help preserve 
the team in Boston.
Ken Levine also left the project after a year, 
but as you'll come to hear from others,
some of the foundational elements 
he established continued to echo
throughout the game's development.
- I can only take very limited credit 
for this. I get, I think, more credit
because being on a game to ship it 
is really, really important.
And the team took what we started with 
and, you know, really made something
very, very special out of it. So I don't want to, 
I don't want to take any undue credit here,
but the things I was involved with were,
you know, those initial stealth ideas.
I was very interested, and Doug
was interested in active stealth,
like, 'cause I remember 
there, we talked a lot about,
there's a moment in Mario 64, where
you have to avoid the sleeping plant.
And the problem with it was, it was
a stealth sequence, is that there was no
way to be actively stealthy. You just
had to move slowly. And we wanted like,
so we were beating our brains about
how do you make stealth interesting.
And I had played a lot of submarine games. 
In those games you're very powerful
when you're undetected, but you're 
very weak when you're detected.
And that's a dynamic we really wanted to 
play with. And so in the stealth games,
in the submarine games, when you're undetected
 and you know, underwater using your torpedoes
you're incredibly powerful. But once the
 enemy spots you you're in trouble.
So you have a bunch of ways to avoid 
the enemy like dropping noisemakers,
going through layers they call 
thermocline layers in the ocean.
'Cause the ocean is actually packed with
 colder water and then hotter water.
You could cross between those layers,
 and those would hide you
if you went into layers with 
cold water versus hot water.
So they had all these tools that 
made those games kind of fun.
So we started thinking about, well, 
what could you do to avoid detection?
DANNY: Ken had a strong idea of 
what Tony wanted to achieve.
He saw Palmer, the protagonist who would
later be renamed Garrett, as a true antihero.
Not the type of bad guy turned good of 
contemporary Hollywood, but more like
the antiheroes from the golden age of noir, 
bad men like the Maltese Falcon who get
dragged into conflicts that are larger than 
them. A femme fatale comes in with a simple job,
and our protagonist is caught between 
forces that are way out of their control.
Thief was beginning to take shape.
WARREN: There was an interesting moment, 
and I think it was Paul who just
stuck his head in the door and said, 
"let's just call it Thief."
And at that moment it was like a light
bulb went off, and it gave the team really
solid direction. I mean, one of the
most powerful things you can do,
and I admit I'm very bad at this, is to name a game 
something that instantly tells players
exactly what they're going to do.
DANNY: The title may have told 
players what this game was about,
but it would take a long time for the
team at Looking Glass to figure out the
game they were making. And that's
exactly what we're going to explore now.
For those of you who have never played it, 
though, let me give you a brief overview
of the gameplay of Thief: The Dark Project. 
At the start of each level in Thief,
you're assigned an objective which usually
leads to you invading a private space
and attempting to acquire 
something that's not yours.
GARRETT: Here we go.
DANNY: To stay undetected, you have
 to stay out of line of sight,
use shadows to stay hidden, and be careful
of how fast you're walking and on what
surface that is. Carpets for instance,
way easier to sneak on than tiles.
You also have a bunch of tools at
your disposal, including swords,
a big club that knocks people out, 
and a selection of fantastical arrows.
But we'll get to that later. What's most 
important here is that you understand
that Thief is a foundational game, a game about 
stealth before there was a stealth genre,
before most games had any stealth at all. 
So not only did the team have to figure out
how any of this stuff was going to work, 
they also had to figure out
how they were going to explain to the 
player how to play a game like this.
Tim Stellmach was a designer on Ultima 
Underworld, System Shock, and Terra Nova,
and now he found himself as lead
designer on The Dark Project.
- My role on Thief had both to do with 
the kind of larger size of the team
and the sort of greater need for 
organization, as well as the fact that
project, and the entire project itself had gone 
through several iterations by that point.
And some of the initial concept work had
been developed there by Ken Levine,
of course, and some of the some of the ideas 
for setting, you can still see Ken's mark there.
I remember I developed this big document
about the idea of like being an enemy territory,
and what does that mean, and how does that
play out over the course of a mission?
Like how do you carve out territory from
hostile territory to safe territory?
And that's where dynamics 
around takedowns come in, right?
And watching patrols and 
sort of dismantling security,
which is one of the kinds of dynamics
that you can get in stealth games, right?
But not necessarily the only one. Doug and I 
had some deep discussions as well about,
you know, the idea of maintaining 
dramatic tension as a tone,
about the idea that a lot of the gameplay
 there is kind of a balancing act
and the implications of that. Like, you know, 
if the player's executing a balancing act,
what happens when he drops the ball, right?
Keep it so that the player's in that sort of
 middle zone of trying to, trying to
keep things things under control for 
as long as possible, right? 'Cause you don't
want them too comfortable, and you 
don't want everything falling apart.
It was tricky partly because there
was not an established genre there.
You know, nowadays it is easier to 
include stealth elements, and people
kind of know what role to slip into. 
A lot of people's default assumptions when
they sat down to a first person game, right, 
 was like, this is going to be ultra violent.
And so we were working against, you know, 
making sure that, to break you of
any notion you might have that that was 
the way things were going to work.
But in addition, like just once we'd 
established, alright, here's the tone,
this is what you're you're expected to do. Again, 
because a lot of it was uncharted territory,
we had just kind of technical challenges. 
You know, you mentioned you could
raise an alarm with a guard but then escape 
and everything would be relatively okay
as long as you could clear some distance
to him. That itself took some work,
because our guards could
communicate with each other, right?
There's actually further systems in place
there to make sure that guards don't
use like third hand and fourth
hand information, right?
So then once the jig is up, like that doesn't just 
like chain react throughout the entire level,
and not like every guard knows you're there. 
That was something that we had to discover.
DANNY: The audio design in Thief
 was incredibly complex.
Guards would chat to each other while
footsteps bounced around the level.
Audio was used in ways that games had never
really done before, and honestly, since--
both in terms of the technology that powered it 
and how it was implemented in gameplay.
So how did this come about, and why have
we not seen so much of this tech and gameplay
in games since?
- Looking Glass was a bunch 
of MIT grads mostly, right?
And so everything was hyper simulation.
GUARD: Don't think you can hide for long!
RICK: And I think that's why the sound
system worked as well as it did.
It was, I mean, for the tech at the time, 
it was really impressive sort of
sound occlusion and propagation 
that is kind of commonplace now.
The thing that we struggle with with
stealth in games, even now, is audio is really
kind of hard to convey state
with, right? You know, it's like,
it's a moment, and then it's there.
And so it's tricky, right,
to keep, give the player the
information they need.
And we tried to avoid putting things
on the HUD as much as possible, right?
To keep that immersion.
And we weren't able to do that entirely
'cause obviously there's the light gem
and everything like that. But, you know, 
we were trying to avoid it.
And audio just is a really, it's a
 tough nut to crack with that.
TIM: Audio was a big part of the design 
process in Thief from a pretty early stage,
which is very much not the case
in a lot of game development.
There's a couple of reasons for that.
One is when we were grappling with
what does it mean to do a game about a Thief?
One of the points of reference we had
was just old school Dungeons and Dragons,
so I'm like, what is the list of thief skills?
You know, listen at door is on the list, right?
There's a real power fantasy 
in eavesdropping, right?
Like people saying things that they
would not say if they knew you were there.
And when they, when that happens, like that 
is a confirmation to the player, right?
That you have exercised power 
and autonomy over the situation.
That as well gets back to the question of like,
well, if you're not running and gunning
like in so many first person games at
the time, like, what are you doing?
Like what makes you special? But then
another in for that was like, you know,
just in the stealth model and again 
in the first person perspective.
It poses specific challenges when
it comes to maintaining the player's
awareness of the situation around them,
 to the point where they can make
good decisions about how to proceed.
From today's perspective, we would 
consider a lot of those decisions
driven by technical limitations, right?
In a modern game, you might 
have a lot of other options.
Like there are a lot of modern stealth 
games have perhaps, you know,
vision modes that show you where guards
are when they're not in line of sight.
Or had we not been in a first person perspective
 that might not have risen as much,
right, because you can see the 
guy who's around the corner.
But we had to rely much more
heavily on audio just to,
just to make sure that the player didn't
stumble upon a guard turning around the
corner through no fault of their own, right?
And so that's a big reason why they
hum and mumble and whistle all the time.
GUARD: Hmm, I thought I saw something.
[FOOTSTEPS]
Hmm, must've been rats.
[GUARD CLEARS HIS THROAT]
- Released around the same time, but starting
 development sooner than Thief,
was, Looking Glass's golf game, British Open 
Championship Golf. And so if you think about,
if you think about sports games in
general and sports TV and stuff,
like what keeps golf interesting
when you're watching golf on TV, right?
Because not much is happening.
Right? But it's the color commentary.
So you know, that game, like we got in like 
Jim McKay to do some of the commentary on that.
JIM MCKAY: Shooting four over in today's 
round, surely looking for a birdie here.
Looking it over.
[GOLF CLAPS]
Down the fairway.
TIM: But it meant that we had like this 
expertise in doing, in doing like AI systems
for color commentary, except the guards 
instead of commenting on what the player
was doing directly, they'd just 
comment on their own AI stuff.
GUARD: Hmm, thought I heard something.
DISTANT GUARD: Someone making noise?
TIM: That's where it started, was in 
sportscaster pattern.
- I love it, yeah. So the guards are 
telling you, you did a great job
getting out of that sand trap, taffer.
- Yeah. And then they're basically
telling you stuff like, hmm, I don't,
I hear something, but I don't see something. 
Right? Like they are talking a lot
about how you're doing, right? 
They're just sort of like framing it as if
they don't know that you're there listening.
PRISONER: You guys can't treat 
me like this. I'm a veteran!
GUARD: Yeah. I bet that's where you 
learned to pickpocket so well.
PRISONER: W-w-when I got back, my family
 was gone. I had no money to live.
GUARD: Sure. Tell it to the sheriff. He's got
a real soft spot for war heroes.
DANNY: The source of Looking Glass's best in class 
audio is rooted in Boston's alt rock band Tribe.
Three of the band's members would come 
to work at Looking Glass studios:
bass player Greg LoPiccolo, who
 was project lead on Thief,
Eric Brosius, who was audio lead 
and composer on the project,
and level designer Terri Brosius, who would
 go on to be creative lead on Thief 3.
Her voice is pretty recognizable too, if you 
listen to Tribe or have played System Shock.
SHODAN: Look at you, hacker. A pathetic 
creature of meat and bones,
panting and sweating as you 
run through my corridors.
How can you challenge 
a perfect immortal machine?
- When I was hired as the junior 
designer and I was actually there
in the building for the first time, my desk was 
right near Randy Smith and Emil Pagliarulo.
And I don't know where the other first hired
junior designers went, but wherever they went,
it was subpar compared to where I ended up.
There was no training. You know, it was like,
 here's DromEd, build something.
Emil and Randy were just like, here's a great 
width for your corridors so that you
can have places to hide. Here's, I don't know, 
stats for you to get, get you started.
And every question I had, they were
 there to answer in a friendly,
like non-confrontational way.
And every question I had, they were
 there to answer in a friendly,
like non-confrontational way.
And then it, I swear, it felt like two days. 
I'm like fiddling around on DromEd
when the project lead came over and said, 
you need to turn that into a level now
for Thief Gold. It was like, 
it felt instantaneous.
Like, yeah, whatever you're doing, keep 
doing that, and turn it into a level.
And I was like, what the heck?
What kind of place is this?
But luckily I had played so much
Thief and sat with Randy and Emil,
and that made the difference for me.
And then you mentioned Jen Hrabota. Loved her.
She was working on some art assets 
for a forest in one of my levels.
And you know, they were tricky objects that 
would make DromEd, you know, very angry.
[LAUGHING]
You know, I was sort of expecting
that she would make me one tree.
You don't ask, it's hard to ask for a lot
because the artists are so overworked, right?
But she made me so many
like cool different trees
so I could just populate the level
and really give it a real woodsy feel.
And it was my experience that the
artists at Looking Glass were like that.
They would just, you would ask for 
one thing, look, I'm trying to build this.
Could I just have a, you know, 
one, you know, book rack?
And they'd be like, no. You're getting 10, and 
you're going to be happy with the selection.
[LAUGHING]
DANNY: From the outside looking in, the Thief 
team appears to be an island of misfit toys.
You have industry veterans like Warren Spector, 
wide-eyed failed screenwriters like Ken Levine,
and a bunch of people who were in a band together.
It's a story we'll hear over and over,
and our next interviewee fits that mold too.
Dan Thron was a starving artist with no
college degree or a portfolio to speak of
when his friend Glen had to leave his position
 at the studio. He recommended Dan,
and just like Terry Brosius, 
Dan found himself in his dream job.
And occasionally voicing characters.
DAN THRON: I did loads of voice work. I did
the voice of the eye, I think, and I did
like, oh god, like a million guard voices.
And yeah, I've done a bunch of that stuff.
And anytime it's you know, it's just
like, hmm, what's that over there?
Like, yeah, you've heard me a
thousand times by now.
GUARD: Hey, you over there!
DAN: No, I have to give like all the early stuff, 
the basic formation of Garrett,
that's all Rob Waters, Marc Lizotte and Rob Waters.
 And they built out the backbone
of that world before I got there.
I think that the reason why art design
works so well, the world works so well,
the flavor works so well, it's because 
it has this extremely well-informed
beautifully designed core of old time 
fantasy that was so well done that
nobody had really ever done it at that level. 
Mark Lizotte's like, his knowledge of art history,
and architecture and design 
built out the entire world.
And like my contribution stylistically
was to make it as weird as possible.
Between Mark and Jen Hrabota 
and I, and Josh Randall,
you know, like we all came to a sort of a 
weird combination of very realistic medieval
and very, very strange nightmare stuff.
One of the, one of the most creative periods
of my life and working with those folks.
They're just unbelievable artists. And like,
 I learned everything that I do now
from those guys. Like everybody, it was the 
way we worked at Looking Glass was like,
so mix and match. And everyone's like, 
everyone was just being excited by
everybody else all the time, you know? 
And so we were all trading ideas,
trading story stuff. And with everything
 to do with Looking Glass,
I think everyone would probably 
reinforce the story. It's just like,
we were a bunch of like sleepless, coffee 
drinking, you know, like unhygienic...
Oh my god, that we're just 
committed to this stuff all the time.
And whenever you came up with a bizarre
idea, you'd throw it down on paper,
you'd draw it out or whatever it was. 
And it wasn't till pretty late in the game
that Thief became an organized
concept of itself, right?
So the process of making the cutscenes 
was like, I had talked with Ken Levine
about like these images, and I had 
experimented with After Effects.
So I'd get a script from, you know, like 
Tim and Sarah and all those guys.
And like, I would start breaking it down
into little Photoshop drawings,
little short storyboards. And at no
point did anyone say like, okay, Dan,
you got to direct some cut scenes and
get these things done. And by this point,
like, it was all just, oh shit, I think we
need something for the story right here.
What if we did something like this?
And I was like, yeah, I guess so.
And then we'd throw it together. I mean,
it was very much like a, you know,
it's like any sort of college project,
you know, it's sort of like, you know,
just throw it into a big bag,
shake it up, and grab what you need.
And sort of like that holistic approach
to doing the game was actually,
I think what made it so successful across 
the board, from design to everything else.
DANNY: If you were to ask somebody who played
Thief to recollect something about the game,
there's a good chance to bring up the
menagerie of unique weapons and tools.
Swords, blackjacks, and a 
variety of bizarre arrows.
The sword fighting in Dark Camelot wasn't 
quite good enough to support a game
entirely based around sword fighting, but when 
surrounded with tools that allowed you
to have other ways of engaging with the world, 
it found its place. In fact, early concepts
ended up being a surprising source of inspiration
 for all of these weapons and tools.
DAN: And so as we gravitated more towards
the Thief concept, right? Like, okay,
a thief does just enough sword fighting 
that this, the sword fighting system
that we've developed seems like it'll work.
With that in place, the addition of the
blackjack just made sense, right?
Like the takedowns and the emphasis on
operating by stealth had to readdress
the fact that, at least at most people's
 skill level, like the guards were,
were going to win in a fair fight, 
a so-called fair fight, right?
[GUARD HUMMING]
GUARD: Hath someone come?
[DEATH GROANS]
TIM: The small selection of arrows that we
 had in that game, to some extent like
that came out of some early, 
some of the other early concept work.
I mentioned Ken Levine's early concept docs, 
kind of almost steampunk kind of retro tech
kind of concept where we didn't want to have
 a fantasy world that was just the same as
every other fantasy world out there. 
So he was developing the idea of this kind of
retro technology based on elemental forces.
There were ideas that were only partially
expressed in the final game about use
of like caged elementals as
power sources and whatnot.
But part of that then led to brainstorming
about like, okay, well, if the,
if the player has access to these
forces, right, like what does,
what does it look like to have the, 
for the player to have the powers
of air, earth, water, and fire, right? 
And you know, those are kind of
all in the game as arrows in Thief, right?
Like you have the earth is the 
moss arrow, and air is the gas arrow.
There's a fire arrow, right? And the water 
arrow is of course, the most iconic,
like associated with Thief.
Like we put a lot of work into the
fact that you'd put out lights,
which most game engines wouldn't 
let you do at the time.
GUARD: Is it just me, or did something move?
TIM: But I don't think getting anyone like, 
got like how the water was going to be,
like the thing that you were
carrying around so much at the time.
Obviously you're going to have regular
arrows that just have pointy tips,
and tthe noise arrow was just like 
too useful to not include, right?
And this does not include, this does not fit 
in our elemental concept, but, you know,
there's more than enough reason
to have it in the game anyway.
- A lot of the levels were kind of built in 
tandem as mechanics were coming online.
So we kind of had to like change
things as we were tuning things.
I know, like, for example, the
rope arrow, if I recall correctly,
didn't get added to the game until pretty 
late in the project, to the point where we
had to actually go back to previous
levels and find places to tweak things,
to add functionality, or like to allow
 the player to use the rope arrow.
I did that in The Lost City, for example.
There were areas where you could,
at one point you can traverse the
whole game by jumping and mantling,
but then eventually I added like falls that 
would require the rope arrows get higher.
- It's a little hard to appreciate now, like just 
the difficulty in having skinned meshes
in that game at all. The idea of like
a polygon mesh that would deform,
that was pretty new technology in those 
days, right? But like ragdolling a rope
was definitely a lot of work.
And that system would go haywire
many times before it finally, you know,
finally got to the point where it
behaved itself reasonably well.
The water arrow, like the arrow
itself, isn't the problem, right?
But the lighting system that like
knows how much of the lighting is
attributable to each of the, each
of the torches and keeps track of it.
And so there was a whole, like different,
there's a whole separate, you know,
like light map texture patch
for every torch in that game,
which is a huge commitment of resources.
But it was so integral to the game 
that yeah, you kind of had to do it.
There were different challenges for
the moss arrow. Like the other ones were
relatively straightforward. Like they,
you know, they go boom or whatever.
But you know, like patching into the system 
that was otherwise kind of being used
for footstep sounds doing all like the sort
of animation to make it look vaguely
like there was moss growing on the surface,
 you know, definitely it took some work.
I feel like with Thief and the early games 
back then, there were fewer roles.
I was officially at a level
designer, a game designer.
And then Tim was like the lead
designer. But as a level designer,
you were responsible for creating the
3D environment, texturing it, lighting it,
scripting AI, pretty much everything you see 
in the game was mostly the designers
had their hands on in some way.
GUARD: Huh, something there?
MIKE: One of the things like as a 
designer doing was using tools
that were provided to us and try to create 
like interesting ways to actually add new
kind of gameplay or new experiences. And one 
of the things I did in the Lost City was
I created these dynamic lights that would, 
were almost like motion sensitive.
So as you walked into the room,
the room would kind of light up,
and then if you left it would dim it. 
Which was cool because it allowed me
to illuminate areas without lava.
And one of the ways that that worked also
is it allowed to player to know
if something's in a room without
going there on themselves,
because the light would go on.
So they might be around the
corner and then a doorway's dark,
then all of a sudden lights up.
And they know that there's
something in the next room.
I thought that was a cool way to
kind of convey that information,
to give the player an understanding of
what's there, or not what's there,
but that there is something there.
DANNY: Thief was commercially successful.
And with Looking Glass in a seemingly
constant dance with bankruptcy,
the team quickly started working on
followups. First came Thief Gold,
which added some levels
and modified a few others.
It too sold well as word of mouth
around this series continued.
But development on these
games had been challenging.
The burdensome workloads
required by these projects
forced many key staff members to up and leave.
So Thief 2 gave the opportunity for
some younger talents to step up to the plate,
and in doing so, they decided to create
 a game that was more focused,
had fewer monster levels, and instead 
had different variations on
what it was to be a thief.
- I think that the thing that we identified
being most central and important to
Thief was the stealth elements and so forth.
And we did get a lot of negative feedback 
from press and from fans.
And some of, you know, even internally
the team they're like, well,
these zombie missions aren't really
working and they don't feel like
what the key thing is. Like burricks were,
you know, you would just fight them.
You don't, you don't have a, it
feels weird to blackjack a burrick.
It's outside the core game stuff.
So we definitely responded to some of
that and leaned into a direction of like,
well, what we could do that was even
more, you know, just based around stealth.
What can we do to further the fantasy of you 
being a medieval thief in a city or whatever?
So that's where things like the bank mission
 happened. We're like. robbing a bank,
what could be more thief-y than that, you know? 
And I've said in the past that I thought
we overcorrected to some degree.
And I think that's because in retrospect,
 a lot of that thinking was correct,
but actually what's most important about Thief
 is the sense of immersion in a plausible world,
but you could kind of argue that if we
had done combat well and had figured out
how to blend that with the stealth type stuff,
 that maybe those zombie missions
or burrick missions wouldn't 
have been as bad, you know?
Certainly variety is a big part of
what makes entertainment exciting.
And, to my, my sense was that Thief 2 
pushed so hard in the direction of stealth
that we lost a couple of things. 
We lost a little bit of the variety,
and also I think we lost a little bit
of the story credibility in Thief 2.
We tried to, we really were a
mission first design in Thief 2.
And we were like, well, a bank would be
a great mission, and, you know,
rooftop sounds like an amazing mission.
Terri's got this amazing idea that's 
going to be great for a pagan village.
And then the challenge after was like, 
so how do you weave a story
through all this stuff?
TIM: In some ways, Thief 2 felt like just a 
continuation of Thief 1 and Thief Gold,
where we rolled pretty directly to working
 on the project and applying a lot
of the same principles, partly because, 
you know, Thief had only become
aesthetically successful at what it was 
trying to do pretty late in development.
In a case like that, you definitely find 
yourself looking at the possibilities
of the sequel. It's like, okay, now that we 
know what we're doing with this thing,
yeah, let's see if we can do it, right? 
There was in that sense a lot of continuity.
In another sense, there was, you know, 
there was an attempt to not just be samey.
And that partly expressed itself in the kind 
of stories that we were trying to tell,
and partly it was just the focus of mission
 design, where it's much more
narrowly focused in on burglary scenarios.
Thief was much more exploratory in terms
of like, well, what could a thief be?
You know, what we narrowed in on like, 
alright, we think that this is going to be
much more just about stealth and intrusion. 
But then if you look at Thief 2,
the focus on maintaining variety
there in terms of like, okay,
like what are all the different things
that burglaries can be, right?
In Thief 2, there's like, you're
breaking in, in order to like,
do a bank job, or to case the joint, or to 
frame a guy, or to kidnap someone, or to...
Like this whole list of, list of crimes,
as opposed to just like what,
like all burglary crimes, right?
And so we were trying to settle into what we 
saw as like the strong suit that we developed.
In general, I think people, that was successful. 
Like my understanding is that
the consensus is like a lot of people 
thought that Thief 2 was the more kind of
mature, polished version of the game. 
Though there's disagreement there, right?
Like Thief 1 is more adventurous 
in what it was trying to do,
and so there's more kind of variety and surprise.
So, you know, those opinions are both
 correct, it's just for the different people
who happen to hold them.
DANNY: Looking Glass studios has a sort of
mythological presence in the story of
video games, that type of place that
every young creator dreams of working at
and every aging creative wants nothing
to do with. A place where ideas were
discussed and fought over, where the
hours were arduous and long, where people
were smart and devoted to their craft.
But I wanted to get to the truth of what
it was to work in this place back then,
the reasons why people left, and
the reasons why people stayed.
- Thief is an expression of, like the world 
of Thief is an expression of where we,
how we were living our creative lives together.
Very open, and very sharing,
and very driven, you know.
People were working ridiculous hours,
choosing to work ridiculous hours because
they were, committed to it. And you know,
 I've since worked, you know,
a long time in the visual effects
industry and movies and stuff like that.
Like I think that corporations saw that people,
 "oh shit, they'll work incredible hours,
like super-duper hours. So let's just plan on that. 
And then we'll make that part of the process."
I'm just like, that's not why we're... 
We're not doing it for you.
We're doing it for the work for the beauty
of the work. And like the reason why,
you know, I would go to Looking Glass at 
three in the morning to do new stuff,
and I would find six other
people there... I know.
It's because they were in love with the
work, they were in love with working with
each other. And we were addicted to 
that constant communal inspiration.
- Like I said, I mean, everything's 
a challenge, up to and including a
team that absolutely killed it. And that was, you 
want to talk about the definition of crunch.
Holy cow. There were people sleeping 
under their desks, all over the place.
There was one time I was looking for
something in Doug's office, and I opened up
the drawer, and there were half a
dozen paychecks. And, you know,
he didn't even have the time to cash his checks.
DANNY: From everyone we've talked to, 
no one, everyone has said like,
yes, we worked our asses off.
Yes. It was probably unhealthy, but I would 
have fucking done it 10 times over again.
- Yes, absolutely.
- So what was it about the, what is it then that 
is, that didn't feel exploitative about it?
- Because we're choosing to. Like, this is what
we wanted to do. This is us, you know?
This is something like, I mean, like you 
shouldn't work for a company that demands you
work 80 hours a week ever. Like, no, just 
forget it, just quit. Do something else.
Better work at Starbucks than
to ever have to do that.
Like, you should never be required to do that.
They should never build business
models around that kind of stuff.
- But like, if you, if you were the person who
didn't turn up on the weekends,
you didn't feel like you would have
been like castigated for it or,
or you would have been outside of 
the culture or anything like that?
- No, no, there was no, there was no 
like emotional pressure put at any level.
Like we were all, we were in love with this 
thing. Like, that's it. I mean, look at me,
you could turn in an eight hour day and no,
we would still all hang out and do good work.
It doesn't make any difference, you know?
But like the people would be there 
because we were in love, you know?
And like, and that's the
only reason to ever work that hard.
Like, because then it is not work.
Like I still work this hard all the time on
my own stuff. I'm not going to like,
I don't want anyone coming in
and saying, sorry, Dan, you know,
it's two o'clock in the morning. You
can't do any writing now. That's not like,
that's, I'm just like, screw off, man.
I'm going to be doing this my whole life.
This is, this is what I love. And I'm
going to do it whenever it hits me.
And with Looking Glass, it hit us all the time 
because we were around those people.
I mean, yeah, sure it's unhealthy, but like, 
it's more unhealthy to be unartistic.
But  never, ever work for companies
that make you do this. Ever. Zero.
- Both Eric and I were there. So that made 
it easier. It's like, no, my husband's right there.
You know, in case we want to get a pizza 
or something, and there were no kids at home.
Now we were younger back then. I couldn't,
 it was unsustainable, obviously.
I couldn't do that now, but it was fun. 
And the people were smart and funny.
And so it was a pleasure to be around them.
You know, I'm not sure anybody ever said,
yeah, you have to crunch. It's just that we did.
RICK: It was a lovely culture and a lovely group
of folks. There was a lot of mutual respect.
There was a lot of capabilities. And, you 
know, like you said, there were folks
that were MIT grads and super geniuses, 
and then there were people like me and Dan
who, you know, kind of like just showed up
 and sat around until we got paid.
But because of that mutual respect, there 
was a really strong culture at Looking Glass
of consensus, right? They would talk things out, 
you know, to make sure everybody was on board
as much as possible before moving forward
 to the point where I think actually
that slowed things down.
And while it ended up with, you know, a lot 
of really great games and, you know,
stuff that people were really passionate about, 
it also really drew out a lot of the design.
But it was definitely a place where you
got a job because you could do the job
and not what you had done before, where
you came from, or what your degree was.
And that was really cool.
KEN: It wasn't a corporate place. 
We would get into like, there were,
people felt strongly about their opinions, 
and there was robust debate going back and forth.
But we also had like design meetings
where we just talked like about a design topic.
And we'd sit there, and we'd get into it. 
And we would just, we were just so passionate.
It was really like my whole life.
TIM: One thing that I think is really noteworthy
 about the team on Thief and on Thief 2
is just the extent to which those
teams developed a lot of talent.
In many cases, like there, it was
their first job in that kind of work.
You know, Randy Smith just like sort
of cold called Greg LoPiccolo.
Emil Pagliarulo had worked in the press 
before that, right? He was in the gaming blogs. 
Mike Chrzanowski worked at GameStop.
Sara Verrilli had worked for us 
before in places for a long time
and tried to quit Looking Glass
 for various reasons.
So we were like, wait, hold on.
Sara's not happy? I didn't know.
We have to hire her back as
a designer. And, you know,
she ended up being lead on Thief Gold.
And, you know, a lot of those people,
you know, they just have just gone
to do such tremendously great work
elsewhere in the games industry.
DAN: That process, and being open 
about your individual creative process,
and sharing it with everybody, like 
that's how you make things greater
than you could make individually, you know? 
And that was the process at Looking Glass.
That's why so many people there
went on to incredible things, you know?
Like it's just, it's bizarre how many 
brilliant minds were together in that space.
- It was a remarkable place. I mean, 
it was, it was a little like Origin,
where you felt like you were going to change 
the world, I mean, legitimately change the world.
And Looking Glass was a lot like that. 
On the flip side, I think, you know,
we contributed to a changed world, 
I don't want to overstate, through influence,
not exactly through sales.
And so Looking Glass was pretty 
constantly in dire financial straits,
and a lot of people just couldn't deal with it.
So, you know, people left. 
The Dark Camelot team fell apart,
and the Thief team was largely a new team. 
But I got to say, Looking Glass,
one way or another, figured out 
how to hire the right people.
A lot of them came right out of MIT. 
There was a definite MIT culture up there.
And so they got lots of really
good people. It was a great group,
had its own culture, its own language,
its own way of dressing,
its own viewpoint on what
games could and should be.
If you're lucky in your life and your career, 
you get to work with one great group.
But the Thief team was definitely one of
those great groups. It was remarkable.
- I left, I left Looking Glass because
 to be honest, I was worried.
I was so terrified of, I had this opportunity for 
this creative life, and I had I blown it once.
And I was worried about the 
company as a financial organization.
And I loved what they did. I adored 
what they did, and they created
really the formative games for me. 
But they, like I said, they weren't, 
it wasn't really a business oriented
company because they really came from this
hacker ethos of that, you know, that
was founded in the 60s
that was, that was really about
hacking and creating cool things,
and not necessarily about running a 
business that can a very long time.
So I wondered if I could start
a company that could take the,
sort of the design ethos that I cared 
about, but maybe have sustainability.
'Cause I was terrified of that company 
closing down and losing my job.
DANNY: Looking Glass was gone, but 
it cast a long shadow leading to
the creation of new studios, new franchises,
 and an ethos of gameplay design
we've come to know as emergent simulations. 
After Warren Spector closed
Looking Glass's Austin studio, he founded 
an Austin office for Ion Storm,
a studio in nearby Dallas that had been
formed by ex id software developers
Tom Hall and John Romero.
It's here at Ion Storm Austin that Warren 
would create his dream game, Deus Ex.
By the time Looking Glass
had closed, Eidos had bought
the majority stake in Ion Storm, had
closed the Dallas headquarters, and was now
shopping around a sequel to Thief.
WARREN: I had a proposal called Shooter
that I started working on in 1995.
There was a point Thief: The 
Dark Project, where again,
I was sitting with the team, and I had been 
playing with Bill, and I just said, look,
I'm not good enough at sneaking. And they said, 
well, if we let you fight, all you'll do is fight.
That's what players would do if you
put a sword in there. And I sat there and said,
I'm going to show these guys that you
can actually make a game where you can
fight, sneak, and talk. And so that's where 
Deus Ex came from. Later on at Ion Storm,
Eidos knew they wanted a sequel to 
Deus Ex, so that's where Deus Ex's
war got started. But there
was one day I got a call from
Eidos saying, we're gonna make a new Thief game. 
We've found a developer do it. And I said, no way.
And I had some folks from Looking Glass, 
including, you know, Randy Smith and others
who had worked on Thief games. With that 
foundation, I just said, get out of my way.
Ion Storm is going to make that. And out of
that came, you know, Deadly Shadows.
DANNY: Before Looking Glass had 
shut down, Randy Smith and Terri Brosius
were put in charge of a third Thief game.
Randy had been toying with the idea of
creating a multiplayer Thief experience,
but this project was killed pretty early on. 
When Randy was employed by Warren
to work on Thief 3, he assumed it 
would be as senior designer.
But much to Randy's surprise,
 Warren had other ideas.
- I felt a little bad because I was spending 
so much time running the studio
and trying to keep my eye on, 
you know, 200 person teams.
And so I, I kind of said, all right,  
I've had my day in the sun.
It's time to start helping other
people make their mark and make their games.
I said, Harvey, Harvey Smith, 
you've been lead designer on Deus Ex.
He worked on system shock as the QA lead.
I brought him into my producer group
at Origin where he did some production
and design. And I said, Harvey,
 it's your turn. Be a game director.
And similarly, Randy Smith had been a lead
designer for awhile. You know,
he deserved a shot and understood
Thief as well as anybody on the planet.
And so we built a team, that was partly 
Looking Glass, partly Ion Storm, partly new.
- Yeah, and so I was assuming I was going to
get involved as a designer, and I was
hopeful that I could be like
senior designer or lead designer.
And it was probably like the, the
move I was ready for in my career.
And instead I was just like, you know, kind of 
totally astonished when Warren was like,
'cause I remember somewhere, 
and Warren was talking to the team.
He's like, and if Randy is willing to 
step up, this and that will happen.
I'm like, yeah, lead designer. But then 
later it was like project director.
And I was like, whoa, that's like two very big 
steps at once. You know? And I was young.
I was like 26, probably. You know,
and then, then it was my job, I think,
to try to recruit as many other Looking Glass 
folks that would come over as possible.
We got kind of a few, too.  We got Alex Durand, 
we got Emil Pagliarulo, and Mark.
We got quite a few people and we'd
continue to work with Eric Brosius, and
Terri Brosius, and lots of good folks.
I remember going into Thief 3 with
Eidos at Ion Storm, and we, yeah,
we had a lot of goals in front of us.
So we were going to make a PC game
that was faithful to the franchise.
And I give credit to everybody, that
was an important goal.
You know, I don't know if I would have
signed on if they were like,
we're going to milk the franchise
 for all it's worth. So it was cool that
one of the things we had to do was like, this is 
a legitimate third installment of this trilogy.
'Cause we, we planned it from Looking Glass
 from the beginning as a trilogy. 
But we also needed to be on
consoles. This is like, you know,
it was like PlayStation 1 was a console.
So the idea that a game like Thief
would be on a console was very new.
And the Xbox was the reason that our
team felt like we could do that, right?
It was like, hey, this isn't that much of a leap,
at least in terms of the way
you approach development. 
Obviously later on it turned out
to be trickier than that.
And a lot of what comes with that 
is like, hey, how can we approach
not a more mainstream market 
per se, but like have a game that's not,
that isn't unnecessarily high
friction, you know? Like what's, 
what's going to be the feel good way to
hold the controller control of Garrett.
You know, there's times in the original 
Thief series where you just feel like
your fingers are on like every key at once
and the mouse. And it's like,
there's just so much to do. And we just
wanted to be like, could you also,
instead of just playing the game like this, 
could you play the game like this 
and have equal power in 
controlling your character?
Essentially, you know, Thief 1 and 2 were
created by hardcore gamers,
hardcore developers who didn't mind
how complicated the game was.
That was our bread and butter. We soaked in it.
 And we made a game for people like us.
And then there was explicit
direction from Eidos, like
don't just make a game for you, also make
a game for similar players so we can
sell it to them. Everything I've just
described as already a lot to do. And I,
when we got in development, there were
some other curve balls that came up.
So one was that I was really pushing, one thing 
I was pushing for is what I call body awareness,
which is the idea that instead
of being this floating camera,
which is the way first person games had
been from that, from that point so far,
you can like look down and
see your hand, you know,
you see your feet, and if you're
climbing ladder, you can see your hands.
And when you're picking a lock, you
can see your hands, You know,
one of the principles at
Looking Glass was immersion,
feeling like you're actually embodying
this character you're playing.
And I thought that was going
to add a lot of immersion.
It comes with a lot of risks because
suddenly there's a fidelity question.
And what if the blackjack 
doesn't quite look right?
And I was like, so it's a big 
project, but let's go for it.
Let's actually just like have this work. 
And unfortunately this sort of backfired on me,
and as much as we got that going,
 and everyone's like, that's so cool.
We're pretty much finished third person. 
We could just do first and third person.
Piece of cake. And somebody made the 
prototype where you push a button
and the camera comes out and we can see 
our character. We're running around and it's like,
we just make the model look better.
This is going to be easy. And I was like,
no, it's not. And we still have to
do all the body awareness stuff.
And then we have to come out and 
see this character in third person.
We have to see them interact with
the environment and we have to see,
it's a stealth game. So when they're 
in shadows, what do they look like?
When they're not in shadows 
what do they look like?
When they're climbing a rope arrow?
When the rope arrow's weirdly tight with the
ceiling, what's that going to look like?
You know, like, our game had so much freedom.
All the Thief games had so much freedom in
of movement that suddenly the idea
that we would just pull the camera out
and this character would just be fine,
you can totally shift that was, I knew that
 was not going to happen that way.
Then, okay. So there was a new engine. 
We hadn't worked with Unreal very much.
And there were some excitement added to 
our programming stuff and art stuff,
which is very well intentioned.
And a lot of this was good, and that's
one of the reasons the game is successful.
But the idea was like, let's
make the game with even better.
Let's replace Unreal's renderer
and do this other thing.
And we're going to have dynamic lighting
and this and that feature that were
fancy and cool, which is
great. That's all cool stuff.
But like now we're starting to see all
of these like issues start to compound.
It's like, we're a team that's
supposed to be developing this stuff.
We're directed by some people in their
early twenties, you know, like, hey,
you know, we weren't the primary
project on, at Ion Storm.
Like Deus Ex clearly got the, you know,
there was times when they
would come and cannibalize
like half of our departments, our
design department, our engineering staff.
And then we'd be sort of like, you know,
on a shoestring budget for some months
until they kind of came back or whatever.
So there was just a lot for us to deal with.
And then the Xbox came in 
back and bit us in the butt where
late stage after all this
technology developed that we're working on,
it was like, oh right. And by the
way, our maps don't fit in memory.
And they never will. We had been developing 
these maps for months, years probably.
You know, where, and this is a lot of
what I was focused on. I was, again,
I was like, over-focused on design as a director.
I didn't understand a lot of what the
other parts of a director's job were.
Would have been a better lead designer.
 I wasn't quite ready for that job
of being a director. But I was anyway, right?
And so I spent a lot of my
time with the level designers,
just sort of like going over their levels,
and we'd played them in all different
ways, and we had like known
what kind of affordances
would happen, and the guard patrols
down long hallways and all this stuff.
And we had to reduce the size of our
levels and then chop them into like threes
and fours. And so that just like, it
was a huge impact to our gameplay, right?
It's like, if you have, it's hard to even imagine.
But if you're a designer and you've made
this like perfect map, it's like, okay,
now what I want you to do is figure out
where you're going to draw lines that
doesn't disrupt your design.
Like there is no such thing. 
Our levels are very seamless.
Like if you were in one corner of the level,
you might still be monitoring
your camera in the other corner,
you might have left a trap
for a guard, you know,
and that you time that
correctly with the patrol room.
You might, no we had these really awful
things where a guard's chasing you
down the hallway, but here's the,
here's the teleportation zone between
your levels. And it's like, well,
this totally breaks the immersion,
like what's going to happen.
I'm pretty sure we did teleport the
guards over and carry them. And so,
but that's kind of an awful
crutch to sort of a glaring problem.
So we were just really saddled
with a lot of issues. In a smarter development,
you would have gone through all this in
pre-production before you had opened the
firehose of hiring all of your
designers, artists and stuff.
And you'd be like, you want to come
out of pre-production saying like,
here's our engine. Here's what it can do.
Here's the constraints. Make your
maps smaller. Or at that time,
say like maps being smaller is
not an acceptable compromise.
So that's not what we're doing.
We're not going to use this render.
We're not going to use this solution
or whatever. And we didn't do that.
We were just, you know,
we were making it up as we went.
- I do think Looking Glass had
a unique feel and culture.
And when I was working on, with Randy,
 I've enjoyed working with Randy,
and he's always made every 
situation work. But still I was remote.
So I was still in Boston, and the team 
was in Austin. Boston and Austin.
And I would fly out there occasionally, 
but I didn't have the same rapport
with the rest of the team. I found it 
hard to, because I'm an introvert.
I found it hard to get to know people. 
So I didn't quite have that same,
yeah, I'm on this team, and it's exciting and
we're bouncing ideas off each other.
Finding the story was tricky,
but I'm proud that we found a story
where the keepers have decayed and
in a way that seemed to make sense,
 and left Garrett alive at the end.
So I think we were trying to set up
for a fourth game with maybe a different
protagonist. There was a lot of
back and forth with Randy and I, 
you know, talking about different
scenarios and I'm proud that we,
that we found our solutions.
- The project went pretty well.
It needed more direction than
frankly I was able to give it.
And so I brought in some production talent, 
notably Paul Weaver. Super talented.
You know, he's sort of like Doug Church,
 an unsung hero of gaming.
And he really helped Randy
and the team push that
game over the finish line. It was
definitely a great team, but again,
I think it needed a little bit more 
direction than it was getting. 
And I'll take the blame for that. But
once Paul came on that game cruised.
And you know, a lot of people think it wasn't
 up to the standards of the first two games.
I think it's, it's an underrated game. I think 
it's pretty swell. I'm a little prejudiced.
Jordan Thomas's, you know, the Shalebridge
 Cradle mission, it's a classic.
RANDY: Yeah, no, I mean, I love Deadly Shadows.
I think the team did an
amazing job. I think the game,
like I see screenshots of the
game. It's been, you know,
I have played it hardly at all since the
day we shipped it, and then I left the
team or whatever. And like I see screenshots 
and I'm like, that looks really cool.
I wonder what that is. You know, like, I mean,
my experience is sort of like I came
into Thief 1 and a lot of the important
foundations of the series 
were already established.
And I did a very good job as a level
designer, like bringing those to life on,
you know, the stages that were
the levels. So you know, I,
someone gave me the paints and I got to
paint a full picture and that was great.
But they, they did a lot of that
work. And then in Thief 2, I feel like,
as I said previously, like we
did a lot of stuff super right.
The stealth is much more
carefully, you know, refined.
The emphasis is on the stealth
in a way that's very smart.
But I felt we lost a little bit in the
magic of the world and a little bit of
the immersion and the sense that you
really are in a believable place doing
believable things, 
and a little bit of that variety.
And so I'm really gratified when I hear
people talk about Thief 3 and they say,
oh, it, it really brings some of
that back. Like the story is,
is really well done. And it's
a good ending. It's like, cool.
Like I'm glad to know that that
 worked for people, you know?
DANNY: Eidos still owns the rights to Thief.
And while they've enjoyed success with
their reboot of the Deus Ex franchise,
the 2014 reboot of Thief had a
tougher time with critics and fans.
Thief seems like a franchise 
which is destined to live in the past,
a product of a very particular 
era in game design,
a flavor of game that is the direct result 
of a very particular creative chemistry.
Looking Glass Studios burned
 bright and so burnt out fast,
but its long shadow still
affects the games we play today,
be it the latest FPS that has a stealth mode, 
immersive sims from studios like Arkane,
or designers who are still inspired by the
 gameplay of those early titles today.
It's almost impossible to quantify just
how much of an impact that studio and
this series has had on the games
we play today. And for all that
we can thank a ragtag group of
mathematicians, artists, musicians,
and screenwriters. The names we've come
to know, and the many unsung heroes,
a group of people who peered through
the looking glass to see a new path for
video games, and crucially, stepped through.