I kid you not at one point my wife while
I'm sleeping is in the style of the TV
series "Lost" is literally having to press
a button every 15 minutes
That like reset something I don't
remember what it was. But she
would let me sleep while she pressed
this button
Interviewer - "What would happen if you press the button?"
The servers would go down they
would literally go down it was that bad
for a while
Hello and welcome back to Noclip's look at
the story of Rocket League when we left
in Part 1 Psyonix were about to try the whole
whole "car soccer" thing all over again except
now with years of experience doing
contract work on various AAA games
the team was determined that things,
things were gonna be different
we questioned ourselves a little bit
were we were questioning like
what it was that made it not take off
was it just marketing? or is there more
to it that we need to do you . Do we
need to really upgrade this game? I think
we always felt that the physics should
stay the same but we did think okay
we've got this big team maybe we should
do something more grandiose. so we had
this idea of cars in this whole open
world driving around to different stadiums
and then you play a game and you can leave and
maybe you play other games. You know we
thought well maybe we're putting too much
focus on the soccer mode. maybe we need
some other modes. we tried some different
things or whatever and they were ok but
it was nothing as as amazing as the
original concept. We've been around long
enough to know and we're making that
mistake and it's a big part of a game
developers life is figuring out
oh you're out of scope - this is just too
big for us to bite off
we also thought maybe we need to make
the game more realistic like more
"to scale". A big question when
Rocket League first time out was
what's the scale? Are these large cars or
small cars you know? Is this a real
world is a fantasy world? And we decided
to just kind of be like - you know what?
It is what it is! And that was a big part of
our decision to like cut all the stuff
out that we were experimenting with and
trying and stick to what we loved and
and just do a better job of it let's
just make up better version of that
I was still full time on Nosgoth at the
time of launch but because it was sort
of our pet project i had been devoting
weekends to Rocket League
for quite quite some time. I can remember
months back in, i think, March before the
game came out i spent like an entire
Saturday just changing ball physics settings
testing it out playing for 30 minutes
changing again. And after a while
you lose all perspective so I'd have to
wait till monday and then everyone would
tell me it was terrible. But yeah that's
kind of how we feel like the game got to
where it is just that sort of obsessive
everyone inputting and changing
little things until it's perfect.
Ben, our level designer and technical
artist - I don't know how many hours he
spent perfecting the curves in the
corners just the ball would smoothly
role in front of the goal.
For me was making bounces more predictable
shrinking down a lot of the
curvy corners because anytime
the balls going to bounce anywhere near
there you're not exactly sure what
you're gonna get.
But then again if you shrink them down
too much than the car can't smoothly
drive up the wall so it's definitely a
balance there we just kind of just kept
focusing on that. That's why I also the
corners of the standard map are now
45 degree angles rather like in
Battle Cars they were just one big giant
rounded corner.
Just lots of little touches like that took honestly years of
iteration to get to
All the games that we were working on the
contract work side are Unreal Engine 3 so they're AAA
so we built a AAA team, we were
used to not working on indie games
anymore we were making the best games in
the business. So we're like, let's take
our indie game and let's put the best
games in the business side of things in it.
We need the polish, we need the user
interface that we have, we need the
matchmaking features that that are up
there with Halo and Call of Duty but
that was his paranoia that if we didn't
do everything we could possibly could
Put everything into this can we possibly could
it might have the same reaction that it
did the first time and I think that's
why we we just did the hell out of it
and people were surprised. They were like
this is a weird game yet it has this
polish that we haven't seen on a game so zany!
We had seen with the first
game it actually was available on "Plus" a
couple of years after it was released and
we saw this massive influx of people
that actually stayed afterwards. And so
we knew that this was the type of game
that if you can expose it to people they
seem to really like it but if you can't
it's kind of a hard sell.
"Cars playing soccer" that sounds kind of
stupid and so we just assumed that
any kind of temporary free
promotion would be the single best way
to get this game into the public
consciousness that we could think of.
Interviewer - "What's it like working on a game where..."
"....the elevator pitch first that seems kind..."
".....of stupid?"
I mean we're not so worried about that
because we knew it's good so we're just
focused on making it as good as possible
It's more just sort of
embarrassing when you talk to other
friends in the industry and they ask
"What are you guys working on?"
And I'm like "cars with soccer"
and they're like got "That sounds cool..."
It's funny, if you've ever had to name
something it's very tricky because the
first time you come up with it, it always
sounds terrible
It sounds good to the person who made it up
but it always sounds terrible to
everybody else. I remember the first time
Epic Games came in and told me we're
going to call the game "Gears of War"
I mean just think about that
the first time you hear it you don't
know Gears of War
You're like "that sounds weird" you know?
But then it takes like two weeks and
then you're like "oh its Gears of War"
So the same thing happened with Rocket
League I had to really push on people
that that was gonna happen.
Interviewer - "Where you in the 
meeting for the naming of this game?"
I was it was contentious and none of us
liked it
Interviewer - "Oh really?" 
Our experience with names is
that noone is happy
when we pick it and then when you
get used to it it's fine and in
retrospect that sounds like a great idea
But there was a lot of concern that
Rocket League did not convey anything about
soccer or cars like a kind of sounds
like a shooter or something
there was all sorts of names like
Battleball Arena which kind of sounds like
Battle Ballerina. There was all sorts
like "Rocket Sports League". We we're really
going for that like - what if it
sounded like a European sports
association or something?
I think we decided that as long as the
name was paired with the logo it would
be fine but we considered all sorts of
terrible names that I can't say on
camera
Well for a while we had joked that we
would have it as the subtitle. So it would be
"Rocket League: Supersonic Acrobatic
Rocket-Powered Battle Cars 2" and then
maybe something else. And for a while
there was a legitimate debate as to whether
we should have some kind of inclusion of
the original title but we made the right
decision for sure
*Presenter Voice*"
Hello my friends Clemente here with your"
"free games lineup for july 2015. Let's"
"begin at the top with 4 games that"
"you can play on PS4 now. What could"
"possibly follow up that game with a long"
"name Supersonic Acrobatic Rocket-Powered"
"Battle Cars? I'll tell you..Rocket League"
"yes the high-flying stunt and frenzied"
"multiplayer of this car crazy soccer"
"game have returned to PlayStation with"
"a mix of online and offline multiplayer"
"insane trickshot and more"
"Rocket League's got it going on!"
Interviewer - "Obviously trying to get more"
"people into the server's was a thing"
"for you guys"
"with first game. What was the feeling with the"
"PlayStation Plus thing?"
"Going into it how did that feel?"
"Did it feel right? Was it a bit of a worry?"
It was a big worry because we didn't know
if it was the right decision. We had a
lot of fear that we would make no
money on the game because it was a fight
to get.. you know obviously developers
can't really go into the details of
their agreements with Sony but you kind
of fight for an amount that they pay you
and then you hope that's enough if
nothing else happens. And it was really
concerning that we might just sign away
a whole lot of this money and then
the game drops off even within the first
month. Yea it blew up on PS Plus
but what if it's like 5 million
people download it and then no one ever
buys it ever again and we've made
nothing and we have to pay for servers for
5 million people
The reason we went PlayStation Plus was was strictly a
budget issue. I shouldn't say strictly but
it was a large factor. Number one
we didn't have any money to spend, our
budget for marketing and PR was
practically nothing
and so our big challenge is how do we
get this out to other people and so
our strategy was if we don't have the
money to market this game - We let Sony
market for us because they put in
millions of dollars a year into marketing
their PlayStation Plus games and they do
it month after month regardless of
what the game is.
It was a difficult decision it wasn't
like - this is absolutely 100% what
want to do. It took a lot of a lot of
discussions and i still remember all the
meetings we had.
Multiple. All the way up to almost before
the game was announced for PlayStation
Plus we were on the fence
We were doing a beta and we gave it to streamers and
suddenly there's this buzz about the
game that we hadn't seen for the
original game. Wow we were like....
this is already looking like it's gonna be
big
Do we want to give the game
away for free for a month?
We had an inkling that it would be popular because
of the PlayStation Beta but it was still
sort of abstract. People are
liking this but we know if they will like
it past the first couple weeks .
Like, will have staying power?
Prior to launch there was a lot of
anticipation because we've launched
games before with Supersonic and Arc
Squadron and so we've gotten used to
being let down. So we learned not to
get our hopes up but the beta was
looking pretty good and so we actually
we did lett our hopes get up a little
bit like - maybe this game will pay for
itself and we'll live the dream of having
games pay for themselves and we could just
keep making more games
All the work was done the game played great the servers were
ready. The PlayStation deal with signed.
It was launch day. The team held their
breath....and then....
Everything was on fire.
Everything was on fire!
Everything was on fire! We thought maybe 40,000 people
at once maybe 50,000 if it was awesome
We got 150,000 people
playing at once
I would like to say that we popped
champagne and had a week of just
basking in the glow of people but it was
really like the servers were so messed
up that it was the guys that fix that
sort of scrambling to do anything
and everyone else sitting quietly like
Can I do anything? Can i go
get them food? And it was a lot of sort
of being on Reddit and Twitter
massaging the reaction to the servers
being down again.
You have to write things at a certain scale
You can't just make it infinitely scalable
You can scale within 50,000 to
150,000 or  150,000 to
a million but you can't make
something that is scaled to either 0 or
infinity. And we realized we aimed
for this and we needed to aim for this over here
Wwe had a real fear the first
three weeks or so when we're going down
almost every day
that we had a hit that was going to
peter-out because people will just leave
because it didn't work.
We were just terrified a basic blowing our shot
Fortunately I think
we survived that. I think most companies do
survive that. They usually survive the
popularity. But I'm impressed with what
the guys - I don't take any credit for this -
but I'm very impressed with what
our online tech team was able to do
to basically rewrite the entire scalable
backend in about two weeks and get
everything up and running
Interviewer - "What was it like seeing the PC sales ripping up Steam?"
I was so happy. I was one of the
people that had to fight for the PC version
We originally were targeting PS3
and PS4 cross-play. So it was going to come out
on both and they'd be able to play with each other.
And we knew at the time when we
were planning that PS3 was still this
massive user base so if we can
hit that - we don't have to downgrade the
graphics that much - and we get this userbase
But it became apparent near our launch
that we wouldn't be able to
get it ready in time. I was a strong
proponent along with a couple
of other guys on this team because I
love playing on Steam. All my friends
play games on Steam. We weren't sure
what the controller barrier would do but
we knew that if we had the cross-play
stuff in place there would at least be a
player-base. Whereas you know, on its own
the PC might have suffocated under
not enough people to matchmake against
But we just had a hunch that it would be
good and it saved our ass honestly
because it paid for everything right away
We were getting sales from Steam
and they were killing it
I mean we were just top of the charts
and just looking at all this PlayStation
players thinking "it's doing too well"
on PlayStation. It broke all their records
and then we're like "okay there's gonna"
"be nobody left on PlayStation"
We were literally doing the math of like
how many people have a
Playstation and how many have this
game already? Because there's nobody else left to
buy it anymore.  Sony had always
told us - "no that can't happen it's"
"never gonna be that way" but we we're
looking at the numbers thinking "I think we"
"really hit a significant portion of the"
"PlayStation audience"
Interviewer - "I would love to know the numbers of how many people got
"this on PlayStation Plus something tells"
"me that's not something Sony"
"will probably let you talk about"
Yea we'd we'd love to actually share every
number we have - we're a pretty open
company
in terms of what we've done but
there are certain contractual
obligations that we have. There are
certain numbers we can't disclose and
one of those is the number of
PlayStation Plus users that we have.
However we have been very vocal about
how many players we have so and and I've
let you know how many copies sold so
maybe some math you can imagine...
Interviewer - "How many players do you have?"
We have over 22 million players so it's
done very well
And that counts individual
players and split screen it doesn't
differentiate between owners necessarily
its just how many people have played Rocket League
It kept doing well it kept doing
better and better and better
and now that I look back it's very easy to
say that it absolutely was the best
decision. We make more now than we did at
launch every month so absolutely it was.
You know I think almost objectively
you can say that it was a good idea at this point
Rocket League was a success
a massive success in fact for a team
had cut their teeth doing contract
work for other studios
it was a success they weren't really
used to. Rocket League made back its
development costs incredibly quickly and
suddenly Dave and the team were looking at
a future in which they wouldn't have to
do contract work anymore...
Interviewer- "It must be a bit of a rough turn going from"
"Nosgoth to Rocket League."
Oh no, that was fantastic
that's definitely very welcome because
before Nosgoth was Hunted: The Demon's Forge
so I had spent like a solid six
years in this in a medieval, gory setting.
So cars and boosts and mechanical
sounds was a welcome change!
Hollywood Principle is a collaboration
of me Elliot Sencan and Kayla Hope.
They're both very talented
musicians I met in San Diego.
Interviewer - "In my head I imagine people just go oh"
"we need menu music somebody come up"
"with some and it just so happens you"
"have all this rad dance music you've"
"been working on. How did it happen?"
So originally that was never the intent
we went through a lot of different
iterations on what the menu music should be
Everything from very ESPN
SportsCenter type things to Monday
Night Football to various throwback, fun
playful, Nintendo 64 type music. And each
one of them would be in the game for five
or six months and eventually someone in the
office would be like "yeah I don't know"
"I'm not really feeling that"
"it gets pretty old"
It really came down to a point where I
just took a whole bunch of music like my
music some of the other people in the
office - they have bands and stuff
and just threw it on the front main menu
and let it sit just see what people said
After a while the stuff that stuck
was just all of my personal music. It's
actually kind of funny because you'll
read comments like -  "this song sounds"
"like it came out of 2009"
Ah....well I wrote that in 2009
So you're not wrong!
It was never really intended for that kind of purpose it's
just what happened to fit the vibe of
the game and fi itt well and it just ended
up being a thing that it kind of
embodied the spirit of the game like fun
bouncy EDM. It becomes an identifier for a
DLC pack. A temporary time period in
Rocket League where you get like this
identified like "I remember this"
So as soon as we knew we were going to
go PlayStation Plus our mitigation strategy was
it's going to be free but let's get some
DLC out. And unfortunately it took us a
lot longer so it came out maybe month
two instead of month one
for that first pack
Interviewer - "Tell me about how the ice hockey mode came about?"
That one, again I wish we could say
it was a master plan. One of our
artists had made this really cool snowy
iced-over map version of the default map
DFH Stadium. And we we're going to release
it as a holiday thing because that's
what you do right? When you're a big game
you have a holiday event! And we we're
joking.....we have these things
on fridays called "Beer Friday" where we
hang out after work and drink and
talk and we we're like "It would be cool if"
"there was like a puck" and I think we
threw that in, in two hours and then
play-tested on Monday and shipped it out
It was very lightly designed it
was very much like "a puck wouldn't"
"bounce very much and it would kind of stick"
and it was fun enough. We said we'd throw
it in and see what people think of it.
We had no inkling that there would be this
weirdly devoted subset of players that
only play snow day.
Our plan was to take it
away to have it be, much like a brawl and
other games, like a seasonal
mode that would come and go every Winter
And we took it out in February and there
was this revolt on Reddit so we thought
"well it doesn't cost us anything to"
"leave it in so...". It's a very hardcore
couple thousand people that's all they
do
Interviewer - "Are they all Canadians?"
I don't know we haven't done a survey
I suspect there's a over-representation of
Canadians probably
We knew that we really liked doing aerial stuff and we
had thrown some hoops in a map
We thought it'd be cool if there was a mode where
you're dunking the ball downwards
I think they had tried at
one point a version where
it was actually just on the floor like
holes in the floor that you could score through
And I was just too easy
Basketball took a long time and i
would say we didn't hit the mark entirely.
We're starting to hit the end of.
We had kind of a wishlist of features
when the game came out.
We always want to do a NEO Tokyo map
A lot of the guys love Akira and
it's such a cool visual style so we thought
it would be awesome if one day we got
to release a map that had this sort of
anime, eighties, cyberpunk visual style.
Interviewer - "What's it like having a level in the"
"game named after yourself?"
Uh...It was weird
especially when you're watching the
streams and you hear them say your name
that's a little bit weird. My dad loves
it though.
Whenever he watches the streams
Like when we we're at LCS for
instance he was like "Why aren't they"
"saying the name of the map?
"Wait they said the name of a map this time"
"I heard them say it this time!"
So that all that was pretty funny
I think he enjoys it more than I do
Interviewer - "It's incredible that all the people we talked"
"to today, you know, Rocket League is a game"
"that was a decade in the making in many"
"ways from days back in Epic in"
"North Carolina to Battle Cars"
"eventually haveing it launch and be so"
"successful but in a very strange way the"
"music in the game is also your legacy"
It's definitely fascinating because
I never intended for the Mike Ault music
to take off like that. It was like just a
personal endeavor
So it's it's definitely been a weird
twist on the whole Rocket League adventure
Interviewer - "Are you good at Rocket League?"
Oh, by comparison to the people in the office...no.
Interviewer - "When that game came out, that must"
"have felt like a decade worth of work"
It's indescribable. It was indescribable
I'd probably have to win
the Superbowl or something
to feel like that again because you can
imagine for 10-years trying to explain to
people that your car game with soccer
is the the best experience that they're
missing and try to explain that it's
like it's like playing a real sport and
all these things. They don't make any
sense until you played it.
they don't make any sense
You cannot convince people. They have to
play it. And because they hadn't nobody
would believe me and then when
suddenly all these articles come out
saying the same things I've been saying
like "it's actually a lot like if you're"
"playing real soccer" you know and
"I can't stop playing this game" and
"it's actually my favorite game of all time"
" I don't know what happened"
It was so vidicating
You know? It was it was absolutely amazing.
Best time of my life probably
And that was Noclip's two-part series on
the story of Rocket League. Thank you so
much for watching. This series like all
of the work we do here on Noclip was
funded by gamers who want to watch
documentaries about their favorite games.
So I just want to take a moment to thank
everybody for helping to get Noclip off
of the ground. If you'd like to become a
patron yourself then please by all means
head over to patreon.com/dannyodwyer
You will can also get access to a bunch
of extra goodies. If you just want to
watch the documentary though please
subscribe to this channe. We will be
announcing our new project very soon.
Thank you again for watching and we'll
see you next time.
Interviewer - "Are any of you soccer fans?"
Yeah I am!  You see my World Cup ball is behind
behind me
What I liked about it was it
felt more like when I'm playing soccer
then if i play FIFA. You don't go
In FIFA and practice a shot
i'm gonna get it right this time now I'm
gonna get it right this time
that's what I do on the field you know
you get in front of a goal you get a
bunch of balls and you try to hit the
upper 90 and that's one of things i
think that makes the game so special
We launched the PS4 beta and had no chat in
it we had the chat box because the pc
beta had had - it's so easy on PC to just
press a button and type away and our
veteran players were pretty disappointed
because they're on ps4 and they couldn't
talk to anybody. And our first reaction
among the design team was
to say well obviously we have to add
chat and i'm sitting in the back of the
room thinking I don't want the guy
playing goal on my team typing into
"the virtual keyboard "screw you buddy!"
and so we started
brainstorming like well there's only a
certain set of things you need to
say quickly and so we
napkin drew out the quick chat system
as you see it today in that meeting
the thing I can't say that we planed but
really benefited from is it's so easy to
use on console that makes it easier to
i would say nice but there's a lot of
sarcasm there - but it's easier to be nice
than to type out hateful
messages on console. So in some ways it
steers are playerbase towards positivity
or at least gentle sarcasm and not outright hatred.
Interviewer - "What's the most used term in chat?"
"Sorry" I think is number one and
 "What a Save" sarcastically
might be number 2? I'm not
sure i have to look at the data on those
We edited quite a few out
A bunch of them had ellipses on the
end like "Nice..." and when you
see that in print - that's only
ever going to be sarcastically so we
tried to find the minimum set of what is
a compliment that isn't too negative we
did add "Calculated" that was a popular
community term on Reddit so we thought
we might as well let them express
themselves the same way in game as they
do out of game it's it seems to be
popular along with "Siiick" with three i's
which was a quote of one of our
environment artist that makes some of
the maps he would always say "Siiick"
whenever he scored a goal so we threw
that in there too