[TYPING SOUNDS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
DANNY: Three years ago, we visited Id Software in Texas
to film our documentary on Doom 2016.
If you like Noclip stuff, you probably knew that.
But what you probably didn't know is
that while we were there, we filmed
three interviews around the history
of Quake and their then-upcoming
shooter, Quake Champions.
Sadly, we never finished filming that project,
Sadly, we never finished filming that project,
and so a bunch of interviews, including one
with Quake veteran Tim Willits,
sat on our hard drives for the next three years--
so long that Tim has since shipped Rage 2
and left Id Software to become
chief creative officer at Saber Interactive.
But then we noticed that this month
Quake III, one of the greatest
online shooters ever made,
turned 20 years old. So what a perfect excuse
to dive back into the archive and resurrect this interview.
So for fans of gothic horror,
sci-fi shooters, and
bipedal multiplayer eyeballs,
here's our interview with Tim Willits about
the history of the Quake franchise.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
TIM WILLITS: Really, Doom II existed because
we wanted to commercialize Doom more
and get it into retailers.
Back then, it was a natural progression in gaming
to work on a new title.
That's what Id Software did for years.
The Quake engine was true 3D,
which had a whole number of issues
that we had to overcome, from how do we create levels,
how do we steer players,
how do we create these environments?
So we were tackling those technical challenges
at the same time that we were developing
the technology and the game.
So keeping with the very flat structure of Id Software
at the time, it really was very loose.
You know, we knew we wanted to make it dark, powerful weapons,
some Lovecraftian inspirations,
but that was really kind of the game design.
John Carmack used to always say that
teleporters are a crutch
for bad level design.
You could extend that a little farther to say that
slipgates was a crutch for bad game design.
Because we had very little
creative direction, we all just kind of went
in our own direction.
There were four principal level designers
that created their own kind of unique style.
So we were like, OK,
we have four elder gods,
and we have four runes, and we have four episodes.
If we had five level designers we probably
would've had five episodes and runes.
And then we just stuck the slipgates around,
and made it all kind of worked, and washed our hands.
[GUNFIRE]
You can see parallels to a lot of
the enemies in Doom in Quake.
Like the demon in Quake was obviously
the pinky from Doom.
Death Knight was the Hell Knight.
But because we had so much freedom,
and because there was such of a lack
of unified creative direction,
Kevin Cloud and Adrian Carmack
really went wild with the creatures,
especially the ogre.
He's got a chain saw and a grenade launcher.
[EXPLOSIONS]
Grenade bouncing was definitely new.
It was very difficult at first,
because even strafing wasn't
really something that people did.
So when things were bouncing at you,
it threw us off as developers.
It threw people off as players.
And then to have an AI,
have a monster that does that is like, ahh!
DANNY (OFFSCREEN): Is there any enemy types
that didn't make the cut, perhaps, in Quake I?
Can you even cast your mind back that far?
- Yes, the dragon.
DANNY: Oh, right.
-Yes, remember--
DANNY: Yes, the screenshot!
- The famous screenshot.
That's when game developers just put
screenshots up before actually thinking,
should we actually put this up?
So, yeah, it was, we made a model
and just kind of placed it in the world
and went, this is going to be awesome.
There's a dragon flying over this castle.
Screenshot. Release.
And no one ever thought, hey,
should we actually get this working?
Is it fun?
Dragon AI's really tough.
[ROCKET SOUNDS]
The Quake franchise definitely has always
kind of suffered from a little identity crisis,
and honestly, we were not actually going to
call Quake II “Quake II.”
One of the guys on the team posed the
word “wor,” W-O-R,
because it was the war with Strogg versus the humans,
which in hindsight we probably
should have done that. We probably should have had Quake I be Quake,
and then Quake II be Wor,
and then Quake III be Quake II,
and then Quake IV become Wor II,
and we'd have two franchises.
Instead we have Quake confusion.
We had something amazing with Quake,
but the story was all over the place.
So we really wanted to focus the design,
we wanted to focus the story,
we wanted to make the game more engaging,
which is how the story came about.
It's really a parallel to The Guns of Navarone,
the old movie,
where the allies have to destroy
so the allies could land on Beachhead during World War 2.
That was really the entire inspiration
of the story of Quake 2.
And then the Strogg concept,
which was another desire
to unify the creatures.
Like in Quake, the creatures were all over the place.
It's not so great for a single player story driven type game.
[EXPLOSIONS]
[GROANS]
Yes, Paul Steed came up with the grenades.
He was our only animator at the time,
so he animated all of the Strogg.
He gave them that personality,
like the enforcer would go like this,
and then you could shoot his head off.
But yes, grenades, how you could throw them,
yes, that was pretty advanced gameplay at the time.
[ROCKET LAUNCHING]
I watched the movie Eraser,
if you remember, with Arnold Schwarzenegger?
Yes, and I thought that was a cool movie.
Came into work the next day, and John Cash was the programmer
working on the weapons. And I said, hey!
Let's make-- it's like a rocket launcher,
but it's instant, and then
we'll make a twisty thing just like the movie Eraser.
- Shit!
TIM: But what really set Quake II apart
was the explosion of multiplayer mods.
he grapple hook was the greatest invention
for any Quake game
that we never came up with.
And there were so many mods for Quake II
that the multiplayer took on a life of its own.
You'd  find the newest mod, you'd download it,
and you'd play a different type of game.
So it always offered something new
because of the explosions of the mod scene.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So John Carmack came to the design team
with a concept, a multiplayer only game
with persistent  worlds.
You'd have your kind of home world,
and then you'd fight for your elder god--
he was always into the elder gods.
You could fight for your
elder god, and then you could attack other worlds
and things. And you could jump through these gates
to these other worlds.
GAME VOICEOVER: You have taken the lead, excellent.
TIM: So when we proposed to our publisher,
Activision at the time, that we wanted to make a game
that required a graphics card in your machine,
they told us that we were insane
and that it was the worst idea ever.
DANNY: What was it like knowing that Epic
were releasing a game
within the same window that didn't require
an OpenGL graphics card?
You know, I've never really worried about competitions.
We used to say that we don't need other games to
suck to make our games good.
So even at that time, I'm playing those games,
I play them. I know the guys that worked there.
They're all great guys.
And I think it actually helped us.
It actually helped the industry,
and it helped our game even be better.
[WARPED VOICES]
[GUNSHOTS]
GAME VOICEOVER: Excellent.
Most of the item placement
in the original Quake 3 was luck.
You know, yeah, we moved things.
We kept the rocket launcher away from the red armor.
- But really, all the subtle things that
people are like, “you guys are geniuses,” no.
We just put it down, and it worked.
[GROANING]
So the origins of that map was a bet.
It was a QA guy that came down from Activision.
So he came down, and I said
I could make a map from start to finish
in under an hour.
So I made that map in about 50 minutes.
DANNY: I think that map might have like
the world record for the fastest possible flag capture.
You can do it in like six seconds or something like that.
TIM: Probably faster than that.
You could probably, yes.
'Cause you can pick up the flag, rocket jump, hit--
Yeah, you could probably do it in like two and a half seconds.
GAME VOICEOVER: You scored.
You know like DM13, DM6, the Longest Yard,
those are the true classics that have withstanded
the test of time, but we had no idea.
That's one of the things about creating these games
and these levels is you don't know
what people are going to really like.
You don't know the levels that will go on to become classics
And it's always surprising once
the game gets out there in the world and people play it,
what rises to the top and what people like,
and what people don't like.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So Team Arena was a team based version of Quake III,
and if you have 12, 20 people
that are about the same skill level,
and are playing on a LAN, that can easily talk,
Team Arena is the greatest game ever.
So we created this game that we thought was
the most amazing thing ever made,
that only we liked.
Because once we got it out there,
you'd get onto a server, you got you and your buddy,
and you've got like 16 other people acting like idiots.
You couldn't talk to them very well,
all these different skill gaps.
And also, at the time there were
so many Quake III mods
that we're like, hey, we made this.
You should buy this. People are going to be, what?
I gotta buy something?
So it did suffer, but it was the
greatest game ever made just for us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So Quake IV was pitched
right when we finished Doom III.
And we saw how long Doom III took to make,
and we were changing the technology,
and we had our own internal plans.
And the Quake franchise at that point
had become a little long in the tooth.
And Quake III was so, still, insanely popular,
so we didn't want to replace that.
So we thought, well, let's go back to Quake II,
more single player focused, because we had the multiplayer.
And we had worked with Raven for a long time,
and they were-- Raven has been the life and sea of our
technology for years. They're great guys.
So we worked together with Raven
and came up with the idea.
It's a continuation of the story.
So I think we do have a lot of fans that do like
that single player experience,
that are very comfortable in the Quake IV universe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Quake Live was the great experiment.
The idea was you download for free,
you play in a brower--
everyone's got a browser, you don't have to install anything--
and we would make money by selling ad space.
One of the problems that we quickly realized
is that you actually have to look at the ads.
So we put an ad up near the yellow armor,
and people were like “ahh, get the yellow armor, go go go!”
And our ad stats were like .05 seconds,
which is you can't even read the ad
in the amount of time that person looked at it.
The people paying for the ads were like, OK, you guys.
They need to look at our ads,
and they need to occupy a size that's appropriate.
So that ran counter into what the game was.
So we thought, we'll just add ads in load screens.
And then the internet ad folks,
they were all falling apart at the time.
They were just collapsing,
and we had millions of people that played the game.
It's shocking.
Then we thought, well, let's shift it.
Let's make it a little more standalone.
And then we'll have a free version,
and then we'll have a subscription version,
which worked out well.
And it made money,
and then we eventually moved it up to Steam
and then retired it.
So it was really kind of one of the first
free to play games ever.
People have it, it's available.
We kind of sunsetted the service part of it,
but there's still a great community.
[GROWLING]
[SHOUTING]
You know, Doom was insanely influential,
but I personally believe if you look at what Quake did,
it was actually our most influential game
that Id Software's ever made.
From 2 or 3D engine,
client server architecture,
to explosion of mods,
to competitive gaming,
it really influenced so much
of what we play today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
DANNY: Thanks so much for watching this video.
And thanks to all the people on screen right now
for supporting our work here at Noclip,
and the thousands more whose names aren't in the credits.
We couldn't have done all the work we did in 2019 without you,
and we've got some massive plans for 2020,
including filming a bunch of stuff here
at our brand new studio that we've set up.
So we're really excited to get a bunch more documentaries out and
a bunch more smaller interview type stuff as well in 2020.
So if you want to be along for the ride, make
sure you subscribe to this channel.
And if you want to help us build the studio
into even more, then please consider becoming a patron.
[TYPING SOUNDS]