When I started working with unreal
I realized wow you know all the stuff that
you need to make games are here
it was a big shortcut and for a team
that was the small as ours, just a handful
of people that was really the only path
I mean I kind of came out of the
community of modding on 2003 and UT99
so that's really where that whole team was built
He and I were really into like
snowboarding games and skiing games and
stuff where you do flips and things like
that so we want to do it with cars of course.
That makes sense.
Everything was on fire
nobody was sleeping for a week
But at the same time it was super exciting because
so many people were playing the game
The reason we went for PlayStation Plus was
a budget issue. We didn't have any
money to spend, our budget for marketing
and PR was practically nothing.
We just knew from years of working on these big
games like gears and like XCOM and all
that we know how to take it that last
10% of polish that we didn't
know how to before
Yes!
Video Games! They allow us to do things
we could only otherwise dream off like
hunt bandits on the Wild West or score
the winning touchdown in the Super Bowl
or raid dead people's tombs.  But to be
completely honest I don't think many of
us actually go to sleep at night and
dream about doing this.
I mean don't get me wrong this is this is pretty awesome
actually but us gamers are picky bunch
with so many experiences out there for
us to choose from
it's hard for strange new ideas to grab our attention
But what if you stumbled across this idea
what if you thought it would make an
amazing game
how long would you work on it to try and
convince the rest of the world?
Today on Noclip's look into the story of Rocket League
we explain how Unreal Tournament 2004
mode evolved into a global sporting
videogame sensation. And how it took
almost a decade for any of us to notice.
I think I was like six years old. My dad
brought home a TI99 4a and a book
about how to type in computer programs
and I started typing them in and playing
You know they would always have games in the
back so that's what i wanted to type in
then I started learning how you can
change things
there was a little sprite of a guy was
like dancing back and forth and i'm
printing the code and looking at it and
could see the array of zeros and ones
that would make up his pixels so I
remember that sort of "Ah ha!"
moment when I'm like how i can change
this and i can turn him into a dog or
another kind of character. It was awesome
Long story short i dropped out of
college started an Internet company
doing web hosting and it did pretty well
because I mean everything was booming at
the time. But my real passion was in
games and i used the sort of success of
that company to start hiring people
and building a game studio based on
modding existing games
When I started working with Unreal I
realized all the stuff that
you need to make a game is already here
it was a big shortcut and for a team
that was as small as ours - you a handful of
people - that was  really the only path
I knew that Epic was interested in
having vehicles in their game i was
really a big fan of Halo at the time
T thought mixing vehicles with a first person
shooter was the greatest thing ever
I'm like why couldn't i do this to UT
it's a smaller chunk of something
as opposed to us trying to make up a whole
new game so basically made a game mode
it was codenamed 'vehicle mod' we
basically did the same vehicles that
Halo had original five vehicles
Showed it to them at the next GDC and they
were blown away they're like "oh my god
this is great" we want you to come and
and work on this with us
I basically worked out of Epic which was
great because i got that inside scoop on
what Epic was doing and learned all
about how the real game companies do it
"The rules of engagement have changed!"
"Vehicular warfare!"
"Aerial combat"
"Unreal Tournament 2004"
I mean I kind of came out of the
community of modding on 2003 and UT99
And they kind of just brought in a
bunch of community members because they
were adding both Onslaught and Assault
I just happened to get put on Onslaught and
have worked closely with Dave ever since
it was overwhelming at first
getting there the first week and causing
some big bugs and having Cliffy B
come and give you a stern
talking-to really kicks you in the ass
It ballooned into a much
larger team as I got there. A lot of
people from Epic a lot of people in the
community that they hired to come into
work on it. And it was an amazing time
because we were we were kind of siloed
off from the rest of Epic in a lot of ways
we were in a one great big room we
called it the UT2004 war room.
There wasn't a huge amount of deadline
pressure we were all just just coming up
with the coolest things we could and
throwing them into the game as fast as we could
Interviewer - "So how did you come up with the
"mode of Onslaught because with vehicles"
"in a game you can kind of go in any direction"
You know I was inspired by Planetside
actually. I knew I wanted vehicle in the
game but i wanted a more interesting
game type and I like this idea of
territory control. They had this cool
idea that you couldn't take over a
territory until you'd taken over the previous
territory so you have this kind of
moving battlefront and that's where
I came up with node system. So you have
to capture one node and destroy its
power core before you could possibly
attack the next one.
Interviewer - "What was the name of the car with the blades out the side?"
Oh the Scorpion?
*laughs*
I don't remember whose idea it was to
make those blades but that was pretty awesome
just "kah-ching" and then you
mow people down
My favorite was the Manta because you
could crush people you could
fly over them and then we
put this force in that would just smash down
That's one of the things I think I
really enjoyed about UT was
there really weren't any rules. You could
do almost anything
Frostbite for Onslaught was the first
map that I actually made. I was putting
jumps and things all over the place like
I love to ski and that was a snowy map so
I just wanted to put little
ski jumps everywhere, little kickers
Dave was obsessed with SSX Tricky I played a
lot more of the Amped snowboarding games
or Tony Hawk 1 & 2. I love those so much just
the expression of doing whatever you want
He and i were really into
snowboarding games and skiing games and
stuff when you do flips and things like
that so we wanted to do it with cars of course
That makes sense. And one of the things that
we did in that mode was we were coming up
with cool mutators and one of the
mutaters was a map called ONS Tricky
it was just a big obstacle course it
looked look like a monster truck rally
with a big stadium and
dirt ramps and stuff like that.
So we did the typical
snowboarding thing where you press a
button in the car
leans down in a way. And then you let go
and the longer you held it the
higher it flies up in the air. And then we
made this complicated system for the
mouse and keyboard so that you
could flip and you could roll and you
can try to get trick points or whatever
And we thought that was fun. It wasn't
super popular in the game but we had a
lot of fun with it. Onslaught was really a
proving ground for me.
It was my big break
and my big sort of "oh I proved that
"I can do this and make something really popular"
Dave and his team had learned a lot at Epic.
They shipped the defining mode of 
Unreal Tournament 2004
And they developed their skills in
things like vehicles, physics and
networking. Plus there were some of the
only people in the world who knew how to
use Unreal's new engine. So he had an
idea to spin-off his team and create a new
studio that would help other studios
create games in Unreal engine while
using the profits from those contracts
to develop original work
I couldn't hire people in the industry
because they were like "Who's Psyonix?"
I'd say "No I made Onslaught!"
They'd say "That's pretty awesome but I'm
gonna go work for a really cool company
So I hired interns
I started in October 2006 about 10 years ago
I was brought in with a round of interns
2007. Right after I graduated college so about
10 years ago. It's really 10 years ago
because i was interned in 2006 but
full-time 2007
I ran a competitive internship and said "Look I know"
"everything about Unreal Eengine 3"
"It's coming out it's gonna be big"
"I'm big friends with Epic Games they're giving"
"me contract work we're going to get"
"new licensees will come in because"
"Epic doesn't outsource expertise"
"and we do and we're the only ones who know this"
I made two rules. I said
we're always going to keep the company stable
we always need to have work coming in
it's kind of our base. But we always
have to have somebody working on
original content. You go one way or the
other and it can be pretty
dangerous if you go to total, like, we
want everybody constantly burning
the candle and making money come in
you're never gonna be able to make your
dream game and if you just focus on your
dream game
well you know i'd seen so many other
studios try this and you make your dream
game but you usually need two or three
shots at that and you blow all your
money and then you're out of business so
I'm like let's do a hybrid you know
always stay stable but we always have
somebody working on it and i'd seen
other studios try this as well and they
it's too tempting and they pulled their
people off of it but you can't do that
You have to keep people on that and the game
that we kept it on was this trick game
This trick mechanic
with the vehicles that we
pulled from our work at Epi
We didn't know what the game was. We just
knew it involved cars that can jump and trick around
We started experimenting with
 lots of tracks and things like
obstacle courses. "Get through
this level as quickly as possible" and
collect these pickups or something
Cars that can shoot, so we tried a
battle game we tried....
Capture the flag
Cops and robbers mode
We tried an obstacle course course that was really difficult to get through
and there was one point where it had a
grappling hook
I mean some crazy stuff. We ended up
with kind of that zany mode that we
called a "Crash Course" for a while and
then we used the name Supersonic
Acrobatic Rocket-Powered Battle Cars
because the game was so crazy
the tricky part was the maps we had
them  playing on were almost like Swiss cheese
And so just trying to
keep them on the map like navigate the
map and then also predict. Because you
had to hit other players off
the map so trying to get them to just
predict where other players are going while
also not driving off the map themselves
that was pretty challenging.
Interviewer - "It sounds like some 
sort of car-based American Gladiators?"
Just about yeah!
But at the same time we were still working on all of the
contract work and you know working a lot
for Epic. We worked on Gears of War
We worked on UT3. A spattering of other titles
Lots of really cool stuff
The cars felt great they leapt and spun
like skiers the physics were great too
they were predictable yet felt realistic
the game was just missing one crucial element
One of the guys, it with Adam Beckwith,
the brother of Ben Beckwith
with who came with me from Epic
He suggested that we throw a ball in there
My brother Adam and I championed
that at first because we loved "Deathball"
we loved the physics, sport,
and individual player aspect of the sport
So we were like "Oh we can try it."
It might make a cool side-mode
And then I don't think for the next two weeks we
got any work done because we were just
playing this game and we were in the
middle of Xbox greenlight actually and
they had just greenlighted the game after
much negotiation and were like
"Uhhh, we want to change everything"
And PlayStation at the time was actually
being really open with their platform.
You had to have a publisher
to go on Xbox and we had
that whole mountain to climb and the
publishers were looking at our game saying
"I don't get it at all"
 and we weren't making anything
better by saying "Okay now it's soccer with cars"
So we thought with PlayStation we don't have to answer
to anybody we could just make our
own thing and throw it on there so
that's how Supersonic Acrobatic
Rocket-powered Battle Cars came to be
Interviewer - "Where you in the naming meeting?"
I was, I don't remember our collective insanity
I think part of it was
inspired by a Conan O'Brien bit where he
was talking about embryonic rockabilly
polka-dotted fighter pilots and I thought it
was hilarious. So it's actually my fault
I said what about Supersonic Acrobatic
Rocket-Powered Battle Cars?
We didn't really think about the fact that people
wouldn't be able to tell their friends
about the game. Like "I like this game"
"It's called super something battle something"
"and you'll never find it is buried in"
"the PSN store but it's somewhere in there"
Journalists didn't really like it either
because they had to type it so much
So yeah we took some heat on that
Psyonix had worked themselves to the bone to finish Battle Cars
and in doing so had spread themselves rather thin
they didn't really have the capital to
market the game all that well
Now they had added a rather
forward-thinking feature that allowed
players to upload clips of the game
directly to YouTube perhaps that would
help spread news of the game
perhaps it would have if the game wasn't
called Supersonic Acrobatic
Rocket-Powered Battle Cars.
Not exactly SEO gold is it?
A lot of things that sabotage the first
game we felt like we were just
technical inefficiencies that we could
improve on
We had always played the game on PCs so
we'd always played this game with no
input latency at 60 frames per second on
a LAN connection which was dramatically
different than what you got going on
playstation 3 playing on listen servers
over the internet like they're actually
very different games
It did eventually make a 
profit but only because we spent
so little on it in the first place but it
took two years for it to actually
make all of its money back and
that doesn't pay payroll so we
had to immediately go back and in fact
it was a little bit of an emergency mode
because i started to break a little bit
of my rule
It's very hard to ship games. When they
really comes down to "we got to get
this out the door" it's almost impossible
not to be all hands on deck
We pushed the company to the brink
really at that time
I think when you're a little more of a veteran it hits you a
little harder when something you make
not "fails" but isn't a huge success and
at the time it was like our second thing
we've done so it kind of felt like all
of course we'll just move on to other
projects. We had the same feeling going
into Rocket League where it's like
"this could be a big thing if people just get into it"
and with the first game they
just didn't so much, except for our
super hardcore fans
We had to take some
projects pretty quickly afterwards that
maybe we're not the most ideal terms and
were really rough on us
We had to push a lot harder than we
normally did. We did a few updates for
Battle Cars but i decided to
strongly focus on studio building at
that point. I'm like "we needed a bigger
"studio we need more expertise at what"
"we're doing. We're going to come back to"
"this game" and we always knew that
We always knew we were coming back to it at
some point
We were really good at multiplayer and
we really good vehicles so a lot of our
work ended up being around that and as
we grew we'd gotten a stronger and
stronger reputation on the multiplayer
side of things. So everybody who was doing
UE3 game that had a multiplayer side...
That's why Mass Effect 3 came to us
actually is a good example
Mass Effect 3 was mostly just consulting and a
little bit of work, and then others like
Bulletstorm were like "Make our multiplayer mode"
And then when Nosgoth came along
that was a really big change for the studio
it was a publisher saying "hey we want"
"you to make this game" that was a big
deal for the studio because it allowed
us to expand a lot and build our
art team in particular and become a
really full featured studio
that was at the same time we decided to
reboot Battle Cars into to what became
Rocket League
It was sort of hard to talk ourselves
into spending a bunch more money making
the same thing again but it was always
kind of like well our fans probably
deserve an updated sequel at some point
There was a very strong community around it
We we're talkin these guys and we knew them
super well. You know guys like Kronovi who
was playing under his his dad's name at the time
"Steve Bills". Gibbs, all those guys
were there from the beginning
and we knew all of them and
we just wanted to do right by ourselves
we want to do right by them
You want to give contract work your all especially
just to keep the company going, but you
always have these outlets for
"this is how we would do it if we were in charge"
the first game was all the same pieces
I think if you go back and
play it now you'll see all the same
things it just doesn't feel as good
and we just knew from years of working
on these big games like Gears and
XCOM and all that. We knew how
to make something really good all of a sudden.
We knew how to take
it that last 10% of polish that
we didn't know how to before
And we felt like that would
push it over the edge maybe...
Psyonix had evolved from a scrappy
Unreal Engine coding house to a
confident studio capable of
self-publishing their own games. But they
still hadn't have their hit
what happened next would not only change
the future of the studio forever but it would change
the way we think about sports games
forever too. In part two I talked to Psyonix
about battle cars, melting servers
and the terrifying feeling
of giving your game away for free
See you then