- Looks like we have some 
tests to run through today.
Probably not the kind of thing you're
used to, I imagine, but trust me,
you're going to do fantastic.
RICARDO BARE: I think the nugget of 
the idea was more like Arx Fatalis.
instead of a level based, mission based game, 
it's a contained, you know, big structure,
like a dungeon, or a spaceship, 
or one big-ass building, or a city.
Just like one space that  was not completely
 linear in the way Dishonored is, right?
In terms of like the mission sequence. 
Eventually we hit on the like,
let's do the science fiction
version of this on a space station.
And so Raf started working
on a pitch where one of the,
one of the chief conceits that he wanted
to do was the whole like mind games thing,
that you can't trust exactly what you see. And 
so he had a very detailed initial pitch of that,
the first like 10 minutes of Prey.
Things kind of snowballed from there.
DANNY O'DWYER: If you're watching this, 
chances are you're one of two types of people.
Either you're somebody who enjoyed Prey and 
can't wait to learn how Arkane designed
this complex, elegant, immersive simulation. 
Or, no judgment, you're one of the many
people who didn't play it.
Prey's a tough game to 
talk about without spoiling.
This is why we released a separate
video about the game's intro last year,
to make sure that this video
is as spoiler free as possible.
Because guess what? Prey is one of the
best games most people haven't played.
We're going to cover a lot in this video. 
Level design, enemy design, bug testing,
dynamic storytelling, and much more.
So let's ease into this by asking
some very simple questions.
How did the studio behind so many
fantasy games end up in sci-fi, and why in
God's name that they call it Prey? 
A game most people associated with
a mid-2000s first person shooter and a sequel
 that famously never saw the light of day.
RAPHAËL COLANTONIO: So back in the days when
 Dishonored was made and was finished,
I was starting to think about
what we would like to do next.
I had a couple of different ideas, and
all of these ideas would somehow be
in the same genre, the same thing
 that, you know, the immersive sims
that we've always liked so much.
Immersive sim is more than a genre. It's more 
like a set of values, if you think about it.
It's almost like there's a continuum.
It's almost like there's a landscape of,
you know, you can pull some sliders, 
like how much of an RPG is it
versus how much of a, you know,
 direct action game is it?
And if you look at Dishonored, and 
you know, it's great sandboxes
and very, very deep in the systems, et cetera. But 
really it's focused on one mission onto the next.
And this time we wanted this contiguous big 
one world, one mission in a way, where, you know,
we've rolled the side missions inside. So it would 
be like if you take one level of Dishonored
but make it to the size of the entire
game. And then you can go back and,
to places that you've been before,
and then the context has changed.
And if you leave an object on the floor
and come back at the end of the game is
still there, or maybe a creature
has taken it or something.
So we wanted this really, like this one
continuous world where the player would
be in an environment and kind of like
against the environment, you know,
surviving against the environment. 
So very System Shock kind of thing.
- Our blueprint or our model going into it was, 
you know, something like System Shock
or like Arx Fatalis, which Arkane
 had worked on before.
So we knew it was going to be a big
physical space that's self-contained
and carved up into different
subsections, right? And that,
that there was going to be a very
strong element of non-linearity
in terms of like where I can
go and when I can go there.
- We had these sort of inspirational
posters of the different tenets of
the project, and space dungeon
 was one of those, right?
Very much inspired by Arx Fatalis is the giant
 continuous space, also by like metroidvanias
and things like that, where the whole thing is
this interconnected sort of mass of levels.
RICARDO: That being said, there was a
structure to the main story, right?
There's a progression. So like, it's not like once 
you got out of the labs that you could just
go anywhere you wanted. There was like 
a gradual widening of the possibilities,
which is metroidvania-like, right?
RAPHAËL: And none of these ideas were 
somehow something that Bethesda wanted,
but they wanted us to work on the Prey. 
Which, so that's, that's how everything started.
We, and eventually we agreed on something like 
as long as I can do almost like a different ID,
but with the same, you know, the fact that it's on 
the space station with aliens, et cetera,
I guess that was the compromise. 
Because anything else was non-negotiable.
That game had to be Prey somehow.
DANNY: Was there a name associated
with this project prior to Prey?
- No, no. It was like a secret code name. 
Like I think it was Project Danielle,
which was like a little bit of an homage
 to SHODAN. But it was just, you know,
it was our science fiction, trapped in a 
big space station, Arkane style game pitch.
The Bethesda group was like, we have
this name Prey, can you please use it?
[LAUGHING]
DANNY: It's a pretty good name.
- Yeah. I mean, it is a good name if it 
didn't have a lot of the background lore
and history attached to it. Like in a vacuum, 
it's like, that is a bad-ass name for a game.
And in a vacuum, it totally applies to 
the stuff that we were working on.
DANNY: Was there any like pressure to bend the 
needs of any of that, to like acknowledge it?
Or no?
Nope. That part thankfully was not
part of the discussion at all.
It was largely about like, we should leverage 
this name. Because it's a really great name
for a game, and we have the rights to it.
RAPHAËL: At first, I had an idea for a
different type of environment.
It was not meant to be on a space
station or anything like that.
And even the corporate mandates in
that situation where we had to do that,
we ended up accepting to,
to take that name, but it was,
it was not necessarily what, you know,
the best choice we wanted back then.
And it worked out. We made
the game we wanted with,
with a name that we did not
necessarily want back then.
And it's the second time it happened
to us as Arkane, you know?
We had the same problem with
Dark Messiah of Might and Magic,
which is the first thing that I brought
up in that meeting. I said, look,
I've been there before. We were
making that game back in days,
that was some sort of a
first-person medieval fantasy game
that was meant to be a
new IP, and what happened?
Ubisoft look at it and say,
fantastic, make it Might and Magic.
And you know, you're a small
developer. You don't have a,
it's so hard to get deals
or just go like, well,
are you sure? It doesn't
sound great? I mean, yeah.
And that's exactly what happened, like the
people who were big hardcore
fans of Might and Magic shat on us,
because it was like not the game they wanted. 
And the people who hate Might and Magic
and would have loved our game, 
like did not even look at our game.
- We were like, this is the game we want to make. 
It's Arx Fatalis-like. It's System Shock-like.
And the name fits if you want 
us to use the name, yeah.
DANNY: The beauty of Prey is that 
it really is a singular piece of art.
The game has a consistent ecology that
makes it very difficult to talk about one
part of it without falling
down a bunch of rabbit holes.
So we'll get to enemies, and guns,
and powers in a little while.
But to first introduce you to this
world, let's start with Talos I,
the space station that Prey is set in, 
a creation that even required a
specialized role within the design team, 
something that Arkane referred to
as the level architects.
RICARDO: There's the whole like narrative flow. 
Like what's the story going to be?
There's the, like the world building, like, 
you know, like the space station itself.
And then there's the, like the mission
 design, like, what am I, you know,
how many sections is the space station carved 
up into? And like, what am I doing in each space?
What's my goal there, blah, blah, blah. Designing
 all that kind of happens simultaneously.
And it's super organic, right? So like 
over here in the like narrative thing,
we'll like come up with something that's
super important, which then, you know,
way over here on the mission side needs
to warp and bend to serve or vice versa.
Like man, Anthony came up with a
really kick-ass idea for his mission,
but it means that we need to work the
story over here to serve that, you know?
Or there's a world-building thing about
the space station that's true now,
and that needs to inform the other two legs.
And so we've got narrative people involved, 
creative direction, level designers,
the architects, you know, bringing
their world design sensibilities.
DANNY: One of the unique aspects seems to
be on this project is the architect.
- Level architect?
DANNY: Yeah, can you, I guess, 
speak to the role of the architect
and to how that is different
to say an artist or an art?
- Sure. All of the architects on Prey, 
I was the lead level architect. 
So all of the architects come from 
an environment background.
So it's really a level artist, but 
where a lot, at a lot of studios,
the level artist creates all of the final props,
the level architects work very closely
with the level designers. And the level
designers are the ones that are
requesting these spaces. I need an office.
I need, you know, an executive
suite for Morgan, all these things.
The architect does a really high fidelity gray 
box. Some level designers do gray boxes,
but the architects take those
and make them make sense.
The word architect is actually 
pretty key to this title,
because you want it to be grounded
in reality, to be believable,
add some of those humanizing elements.
So if somebody really worked here,
what is their experience with this space.
But then also injecting the beauty.
It is an art role.
So it kind of straddles the line between marrying 
level designers with the environment.
We stay in gray scale for a long 
time so that you can iterate,
push and pull, bust a maintenance 
panel through here, you know,
let's widen this for the Nightmare, 
you know, can't get through here.
So then by the time it does go to the 
environment team, they feel really confident
about what they're making. They then deliver 
back to the architects the final assets,
and then the architects do the world-building,
 the environmental storytelling, the lighting,
all that kind of stuff.
- So I think each level designer works a
bit differently with their architect.
I tend to tell my architect, hey, these are 
the uses that I want for these spaces,
and these are the kinds of things
that I want the geometry to house.
And then I kind of let them go and
then assess, you know, you check.
Like I would talk to Rich and say,
how do you feel about this space,
thinking about doing this in this space and 
then fine tune it from there, you know.
It's so collaborative. So for example, if the 
entry to this space, the player comes in
looking at a wall and the door out is
 back behind you, I would say to the architect,
hey, can we have, you know, line of sight that sort of
the exit is across the room,
and it's well lit. And the architect might 
build something that I didn't anticipate.
But it's really cool, and so you find a use for it. 
I remember when I first started working
on fan missions, I would put a trigger volume 
in a doorway, you know, thinking that, well,
when the player passes through here,
 this will happen. What we do instead is
we simulate a reality where it doesn't matter
 how you arrive at the vase, right?
It's when you arrive at the vase
and pick it up, then this happens.
- Putting up your objective structures can
be liberating for the player, and they
can choose what order to do
things and things like that.
But it's also easier for you as 
a level designer when you,
when you remove constraints of like, you
have to do this, then this, then this,
instead of it's like, if you do all three of
 these things, then you have succeeded.
So if you can decouple things like that,
 you can make your life easier,
the player's life easier.
RAPHAËL: We also had a lot of writers 
themselves in the level design team.
So I can think of Anthony Huso, for example, 
who was one of the level designers
not only of Dishonored but of Prey as well, 
or Steve Powers is a writer as well.
They all have some sort of Dungeon and
Dragon dungeon master type of mind.
The way we'd implement the story that
is associated to one level, for example,
would come mostly from Ricardo and I, 
as far as like the parameters that we define,
but then what happens inside was really
developed by the level designers themselves.
- We had certain sections of the
station that were assigned to us.
But then we would also, I think it 
was if a mission started in your map,
then you also scripted the 
end of it, wherever it ended.
- Mhm. You know, we have different sublayers 
and things like that for any given level.
So someone might, this might be their space, but
 then Anthony might want to have his objective
end in someone else's level and say, 
hey, can I carve out a space over here?
Can you give me a utility closet, or a crawlspace,
 or a room, or whatever that this is
going to end at. And then he would
 take over that chunk of the level.
ANTHONY: So I had the lobby, which was 
one of the earliest parts of the game
where Morgan's office was located. There 
were a lot of complexities with the office,
and the NPCs that would show up there, 
and the presentation in the looking glass.
RICH: The elevator.
- Yes. I had the elevator.
DANNY: That's like a real elevator, right?
ANTHONY: It is a real elevator.
DANNY: Which aren't very common in games?
[LAUGHING]
RICH: For a reason.
[LAUGHING]
- Yeah. there was definitely an
 elevator that was a challenge.
It went from being an elevator to being
an elevator with a combat experience in it.
And trying to combine that with a lot of complex 
physics and some insane player powers made it,
uh, it was a challenge. It definitely involves 
some trickery. There were some tricks that
had to be used in there  in order to pull 
it off. Some grade of teleportation.
And you always end up with the same kinds
of problems of now you have something,
you have a moving player on top of another
moving object. And what happens when
it wants to move, you know, the platform 
wants to move at a certain speed,
and gravity wants to shove something through it. 
Or it moves it from underneath you too quickly,
and you don't want the player to fall. So you 
end up in this weird situation of trying to,
trying to glue things to elevators
so that physics doesn't go crazy.
RICH: Yeah. So we have to make the player
 invincible. Then we have to take away
their weapons so they can't like stick glue to
things, 'cause everything's moving.
We can't let them drop stuff in the elevator. 
We can't have people guided into the elevator
and do combat except for 
that ambush, things like that.
ANTHONY: So these things tend to
sort of metastasize in a way.
At first it's just an elevator. And then it's like, 
oh, well, we should have an ambush on there.
And the foundation for the thing is 
not, you know, you never envisioned it
being used in that way, right? So you have 
to rethink, okay, how do I make this work now?
Or do I have to scrap this and 
redo it from the beginning?
The ambush. specifically where you have
that fight, it's not in the elevator.
RICH: It's a fake second elevator.
ANTHONY: It's a fake, it's a fake second elevator.
 So when we do the power flickers,
we're teleporting you into a fake elevator. 
That's where your combat takes place.
And then once that thing is dead, 
once the Phantom's dead,
we send you back to the other
elevator and start it back up.
But yeah, that elevator was, for the 30 seconds, 
I think it's like six to eight months of work
and some self-imposed crunch time.
- We really wanted to get the look of Talos 
and this opulent illogical skyscraper in space
to really feel amazing. So we spent a lot 
of time on the lobby at the beginning.
And trying to find that mixture of the 
Soviet era architecture and sort of the,
like what if Google built a space station with
 all the money? You know, what would it be?
- We kind of delved back in time
to Kennedy and the space race,
but he was not assassinated. So we kind
of went with the art style of that,
that time period and kind of spun up neo-deco.
So then applying that to the station,
there were kind of four locations.
There was the executive where a lot of
that neo-deco came in. The rich, you know,
it's like the public facing. There was
 engineering, which is a little bit grittier.
There were the labs, and then
there was the exterior itself,
which of course was a huge undertaking.
So those were like the four,
there were kind of architectural
sets built for each of those areas.
And then you would bring in some of those
 elements, like in the labs, the directors had,
you know, the leather couches 
and some of those rich elements.
So it was kind of a blending of all
of those four across the station.
With the neo-deco stuff it was the warm woods,
the rich leathers, things like that.
The labs get a little bit more sterile.
There was some color striping that was
added to designate different areas
just so you didn't feel like you were
seeing the same thing over and over again.
There was actually colors designated
to the different characters.
Like if you're a security guard, security
 was blue. The engineers were brown.
Scientists I think were like a blue-green,
 and like Morgan is red, right?
So that was the executive.
When you think about any level, 
there are some signature rooms to it.
So for power plant, it was the reactor room, right?
You know, for lobby, you could think 
Morgan's office is pretty important. 
But you'd pick that signature room, and instead 
of trying to dive in and do the whole zone
like out the gate, you take that signature room. 
And you actually set up a camera,
and you really just focus on 
that initial shot, you know,
so you're not really too
worried about what's behind you.
And it's really trying to do some 
explorations on what that could look like,
and maybe even do a couple. And then, you know,
 working with art direction and level design,
picking the one that is kind of hitting 
that vibe that we want to capture.
Then you could potentially do another
research of another room. And you do that
before you even start to stitch it
together and do the entirety of the level.
Thinking about the whole level all too,
it can be overwhelming. So taking that,
that slice in and focusing on a key location. 
 And it's like what you want the player to feel
and what you want this reveal to be 
kind of gives the artists that freedom
to really explore and go for it.
Part of it was the functionality of it. 
Like what do you need to run a station?
The life support, all that kind of stuff. 
But then the other side was pushing that
the corporate side, like there's billions, 
making billions of dollars off of Neuromod.
So they've got to be flashy. They're 
bringing in celebrities to do the scanning
to get those skills that they can then sell to 
the public. So it was balancing those two things.
So first off it was trying to think a
little bit on the side of authenticity of how,
what a space station needs to run, and
how much are they shipping up to space 
to build this thing, versus also having
 to have that flashy presentation
that they're giving to all the celebrities,
 the investors, all that kind of stuff.
So you want authenticity, but you 
also want a humanizing element.
So the authenticity being like, well, if this 
is the kitchen, obviously they need--
Or if it's the cafeteria, they need a 
kitchen, they need a dishwasher,
they need a cold storage, all that kind of stuff.
But then, you know, one nice place to do a lot of that
storytelling was in the cabins, the crew cabins.
So who works there, and knowing the
story behind their day-to-day lives.
So of course, you know, Dr.
Calvino is doing tests in his lab.
But then you go into Abigail's room, and she
 and Danielle had been sitting there
playing video games, you know?
So it's just knowing the characters and 
being able to add that layer of personality,
but picking the key, the key assets 
so again, it doesn't get too cluttered.
So you get to tell the story, and those things
 get to shine because it's not overdressed.
- We tried to avoid using markers like, you know, 
turn the markers off and see if it still works.
Because it was going to be a crutch. And we 
didn't really breadcrumb the markers any.
So it wasn't like something like Bioshock where 
you've got like an arrow that you're just like
following to get from point A to point B. 
You actually have to kind of figure it out.
- I think the thing that I like most
about, I mean, all Arkane games,
but Prey in particular is how like 
lived in the space feels.
You know, it feels like a real place.
It's not this corridor that was built for
me to shoot things in. It is, you know,
a space that all the
characters have names. Like you
find somebody, and they have a name.
And that was actually thought out and,
you know, planned out by the level 
designers and level architects.
I think that's really cool.
- And to add to that, maybe 
the scale of the environment,
like the entire space station being to
scale and being able to go outside and
explore from the top to the bottom,
and see all of the different levels.
And I think that's something
that didn't need to happen,
but they did because just the attention
and detail that was put into Prey.
The exterior, that guy went through 
a lot of iterations, a lot of iterations
before I even started. I think it's the size
 of eight football fields, right?
And you can fly around the whole thing.
Originally I think the size was
 pretty large from the start,
but all of the areas were pretty condensed.
So starting to space those out so
that they felt meaningful and
gave you that space to traverse.
There was a lot of work done up until
the end to, as you got far away,
the detail pieces would fade out\and a simplified asset would turn on
to get that balance so that 
you don't see that happen.
To a certain degree, the exterior is pretty
close to the interior. But for the savvy player,
hardware labs actually takes like a 45 
degree angle. But the station is actually,
it's like straight up with a hardware
and sim lab. Sim labs? It's Sim labs.
It looks like a T, right, like across?
But actually hardware labs in the,
in the interior itself cuts off at a 45.
DANNY: Right. We'll forgive you.
KAREN: We opted not to do that to the exteriors, no.
RICARDO: But eventually that all gets
 mushed together, and it's messy.
It's not a clean process. But that is like, that is
 like a quick summary of how it goes, but...
DANNY: How do you communicate 
to players the possibility space
without like overburdening 
them with things to do?
- I don't know that we succeeded in doing that.
I kind of feel like Prey probably
was overwhelming for a lot of people.
The more space you devote to tutorializing,
 that's, you know, less space that's
left to then like the sandbox part of 
the game, you know what I mean? 
And so ideally you want like tutorializing
and playing to happen at the same time,
in like a very seamless way.
And that's what we try to do.
- You know, in this case, it's a lot of
tuning, a lot of looking at your testers
play the game, and adapting, trying to
identify when they're confused. 
So yeah, you, you always have the
main, the main objective,
something that is, that the players
can connect with at a primal level,
like where they go or you go, okay,
that makes total sense. You know,
I got to escape this place. Or I got to
find my brother because, you know,
he told me come over, I'm in trouble. 
Whatever it is, you know.
And then you have those little
 breadcrumbs of additional content
that are linked to the lore or might foreshadow
 something that's going to happen later.
Either way that makes the entire thing
feel cohesive. And that's just a lot,
a lot of work of designing an environment 
from like from a world architect standpoint.
You just create your world, and all your
 designers are involved, your level designers.
And as they know the full story, and as you
 work with each of them independently,
then they go deeper into detail, and they
start putting notes on the computers
that reflect some of the policies that
the space station has or something.
And that actually is linked to somehow
such content, et cetera, et cetera.
And that's how you go like layer by layer. 
You're really painting that huge frame,
that huge painting, you know, one detail at a time
 until it brings this like cohesive magic world.
JANUARY: That was a Phantom. 
Typhon anthrophantasmus. Keep moving.
- First couple of levels you go to, 
you go to in sequence,
and we introduce mechanics 
and narrative and stuff like that.
But eventually you start to get more and
more access to different parts of the station.
And eventually, you know, towards the 
latter half of the game, you can go anywhere
in the space station, anytime you want.
We had a linear mission structure, but with some
 built in parts that you could do in any order.
And so that's kind of what our goal
was initially, was to have a series of missions,
but then occasionally you can, you can branch. 
But then it folds back together.
But then layered on top of that, like the space 
station is also opening up more and more.
And then of course, then you throw in on top 
of that, all the like NPC stuff, and side missions,
and just random, you know, player driven goals. 
Some stuff we try to be very overt about.
You know, there's some critical choices
in the game where like, you know,
your brother Alex is saying,
you should do this, and January is saying,
you should do this instead. 
So that's a very overt choice, right?
But then there are some things
that we are not overt about,
but feel like natural consequences.
You know, at one point,
this commander comes aboard the space
station and starts trying to kill everyone
and kill you. And he's telling
you, I'm going to do X, Y, and Z,
and you can ignore him. And we
actually wanted that to have teeth.
It's like, if you just ignore what
he's doing, then he will kill Alex.
Alex will just die, you know? And like
that is, and we would telegraph it,
but we're not super over about it in
the same way as like Alex and January
offering you these mission outcomes
or possibilities. You know,
we'd like play out scenarios, 
even sometimes probably too much,
but like you can end up in the
Arboretum and see Alex already dead
or Alex not dead, but the
Commander Dahl like arriving.
Or you can show up and Commander Dahl 
is like about to execute Alex,
and you can watch it happen. We don't
bury that, but we just like,
we don't billboard it either.
You know, it's just like,
this is a natural consequence of the things
 that we have set in motion, and we're
going to let it play out. And our
level designers love to do that shit.
- At the end, it feels like, oh, makes sense.
But then when you do
something like I did December,
then you also need to go back to the
very beginning. Okay. So let's go back.
Like how, what happened before
 the game starts? Well, what happened
was that you would back yourself up, et cetera,
 and then more than once now.
So now you have to change the backstory
and make sure that it's consistent
across the entire game.
So as you advance into the making more and 
more progress into the development of the game,
let's say now you've been working
on this game for like two years,
making those changes become more and more
painful because now you have to go all
the way back into oh, you know, and look
at all the ramifications and what it means.
And some of them might be in the systems, you know.
DANNY: One of the ones I think is early in 
the game, if I'm remembering correctly,
is when December contacts you.
- Hahaha, yes.
DANNY: Yeah, what was the conflict
 you were trying to create there?
Was it to sow distrust in January?
- Part of it is to support the narrative
 about like, there's more than one Morgan.
Morgan's personality has drifted.
That's one of the themes that's
getting, that gets explored, right?
Like the test that you take at the beginning
 of the game is very much inspired
by the Factor Five. Like there's
a lot of different personality tests,
like Myers-Briggs and the
Enneagram and stuff like that.
But like the one that's, as far as
I can tell, based on my research,
the one that like most, you
know, psychologists are like,
this one actually has a little bit of scientific
 rigor behind it is like the Big Five, right?
Sometimes people call it OCEAN.
So the questions in that test are
inspired by that kind of thing.
And it's what they're trying to 
figure out is, is Morgan's personality
drifting across resets of his 
memory? Or is it staying the same?
They're asking him the trolley problem
to see if he gives different answers.
But some of the other questions, like where
 would you like to take a vacation?
somewhere new, somewhere familiar, right? That's
 testing like his openness to new experience.
But it's all because they're trying
to figure out is Morgan's personality drifting.
GAME NARRATION: Ooh, that's heavy stuff.
- The more you go, then you're steering this
 big machine, hoping that it makes sense.
And one of the big questions that people
have is why don't you have the story
ready at the beginning and just map the
game on it. And it's just going to be,
you know, why do you go through all this
 pain of changing things all the time?
And I think some of it is because
interactive narration is not like static
narration. It's not like a movie.
A lot of the pace you don't control.
It's controlled by the player, by
why, what the player understands.
How is that fun? So the story is
not an afterthought, but it's, 
it's something that has to be
constantly reevaluated. You know,
is it too long? Have we lost 
the player at this point?
Like is the player still thinking about like the 
overall motive or is the player lost into like,
why they're doing the thing they're doing
right now? You know, so it's a very,
very iterative process, which can be 
a very distressing to business
people who are trying to guide us and wait for
 the game to come out, like not understanding
why this thing is so hard to make. After all, you've
 already done it 10 times. What is the problem?
[LAUGHING]
DANNY: Prey is a game where every system 
has a lot of depth beneath the surface:
the way enemies behave, the way guns
work, the layout of the station.
There's always something new to learn.
This is perhaps one of the reasons
 why the game can be divisive.
There are folks who love the complexity
of the simulation and enjoy replaying
the game in new and interesting ways,
while other players became overwhelmed by
all of the systems and had to put it down.
This complexity means that we have a
lot of fun things to talk to the studio about,
but in our conversations, it became 
clear that the team recognized that
this wasn't to everyone's liking.
- There's lots of things I could critique about 
Prey, but I think probably we should have been
a little more aggressive in cutting some 
features from the game so that it was a little, 
so we could go deeper on the
things that we, you know, fewer things.
Game length is a weird thing because
you've got one camp of people that are
like, I want a game that says it's
got 2000 hours of gameplay.
DANNY: Right.
RICARDO: But then on the other hand,
I'm over here, like, okay,
I don't want to be done with this game
in three hours. It's an RPG. I want to,
I want to mess around. I want to have
a cool story and big world to explore,
but I'm also 43 and I've got five kids.
And like, I want to finish the game.
You know what I mean? I don't
want it to last 300 hours.
Like I totally want to be done with it
and then go play something else.
I think we probably had too
many player powers, you know?
I think we went bananas with that.
I think we could have narrowed that
a little bit more, and I'm okay.
And we're okay as a studio with like,
not every player has to see every
ounce of content in the game,
but there is a little bit of a like threshold 
of bang for buck there where like,
well, we made like 90 powers
and the way you played the game,
you only saw three of them. That's kind
of a shame. You know what I mean? 
Maybe if we had a smaller set of
powers, you would have seen more.
One of the constraints or one of
the values that we bit off was like,
the players power's come from,
because of our fiction,
they come from the aliens.
So anything we come up with for
an alien has to translate to this.
And it doesn't have to be one-to-one,
but there has to be a version of it that
the player could possibly utilize as well.
It was cool, but it was a big pain
 in the ass too, because, you know,
you could just brainstorm like,
oh, wouldn't this be a cool power,
but then we're like, eh, but then
the player gets a version of that.
So what does that look like? You
know, and sometimes that was bad-ass.
But sometimes that was like, you know,
we nixed something because it wasn't
feasible or was out of scope, you know.
Our goal from the beginning was
definitely to have an ecology,
like an interconnected ecology, right?
So that they weren't just random
monsters waiting in closets for you.
But like that there was a reason
why they existed, and there is like a,
there's like a whole, there's like a
chart you can look at and see like, okay,
this one descends from this one, this
one does this one for this one, you know,
that was what we started with.
And then of course on top of that,
it's just like, okay, well, what's actually fun. 
You know, what's fun to fight?
What's fun to shoot at?
What's fun to be scared of?
And so probably like the Mimic of course is
the most signature creature in the game.
And that was super fun to develop.
Initially the Mimic was actually the
bipedal human like Phantom. You know,
I think Raf pitched an idea around like
a creature that could like, you know,
disguise itself or whatever. And
then in talking, we were like, well,
let's make it, let's make it not
bespoke or like scripted. Let's make it
so that it's actually systemic. We have
a bunch of physics objects in the game.
Why not just let the creature decide
what it wants to mimic and put some rules
around, you know, how often and
what its range is and stuff like that.
But then we were like, guys, this
means the player can do that too.
Like a player could turn into a
cup and roll around on the ground.
And we were like, ahh! And so that
was like a major freak out,
especially on the tech side, they
 were, you know, they were like
the player's going to turn
into a pen and fall through the floor.
You know, because all that's
like super legit concerns.
- Mimics were like amazing QA testers,
 'cause the Mimics would find
all sorts of things that we didn't want them to 
turn into and would break all sorts of things
all the time because they would turn
 into stuff they weren't supposed to.
They made it incredibly difficult to
ever record gameplay footage of the game
when we would need to put things 
together for like QuakeCon or whatever.
Mimics would do, they would do 
whatever. They were just there.
They'd do whatever they felt like doing.
And so you'd be trying to record something,
and a Mimic would do something really
cool. And then something else would get
messed up in the shot. And then
Raf would see the footage it'd be
like, that was amazing. Do that again.
And we're like, eh, the Mimic did it.
I can't, I don't know how to make it
do that again. It doesn't want to.
KAREN: With Mimics, since they were
 some of the smaller ones,
they were the friendly AI, but
 one consideration would be
having to make sure there are enough 
physics objects for them to transform into.
It was interesting because we had to
account for all of the assets that you
could mimic into. So as a player, being able 
to use that power and also the NPCs
like being able to mimic something
that they saw in the environment.
RICARDO: We had to put all these rules and
constraints around it so that it could be
feasible. That has knock on effects,
right? That means, guess what, art team,
there's no pens in the
world, you know? Like, or,
 if they are they're locked down, but
we typically don't lock things down.
So like that, you know,
then that means everything
that's a physics object has to
be from this size, to this size.
SUSAN: In a traditional game, if this
table was say lower to the ground,
we wouldn't have to texture
to the underside of the table
if there was no way the player
could ever get underneath the table.
But by creating a game where
a player could get very small,
we created far more work for the art
team because we had to make sure that it
looked good when you rolled yourself
underneath the Reployer or when you
climbed all the way up into the ceiling, way, 
way, way into the top of the space station,
where normally you would
never be able to go,
but we thought it'd be a cool
idea to let you go there.
- There was a lot of weird things that 
came out of being able to mimic. 
We had one problem where Mimics,
when they were swapping into the
thing that they wanted to become,
they had a bug one time where they
just kept creating that same object
over and over again.
Somewhere in my archives,
I've got some old video of like
a million trash cans just slowly
spreading across the entire 
lobby of the space station.
- At one point Mimics could turn into,
because they had access to the assets
somehow, but like they could
turn into T-pose models of Morgan.
So you would just see like a freakish
Morgan like, mer. Yeah, it was bad.
DANNY: You just mentioned the Phantoms, 
having lights where Phantoms walk and stuff.
- Oh yeah. We'd have to go in, and we would 
choose to add a few more fixtures just so that,
you know, to really add the drama to
 them walking through this space.
STEVAN: One of the key tells with 
the Phantoms is the fact that
they disrupt all the electrical 
signals around them.
So you can tell. You can be on one
floor and tell there's a Phantom below
you because the lights start to, begin to
flicker and begin to short out and act weird.
And that was, yeah, that was one of the big 
benefits of having a dynamic lighting system.
One of the things that they wanted
for Prey was to have dynamic lighting.
You know, it's, it's one of those
things that we don't, you know,
we don't really push in your face
and scream at you to look at this.
But you can stand in the lobby and just
watch the sun go around the station
and just watch the shadow sweep through
the entire lobby and sweep through all
the spaces. If you stay there long enough,
the systems are set up so that like
nighttime lighting will begin to flicker
on all over the station. And
you can, you can just watch that,
that day night transition. 
That was one of the big things that
we got was just, you know, having
a rendering system that
wasn't relying on light maps.
'Cause that was just a much better fit
for what they wanted for the environment
for Prey.
RICARDO: There's a couple of things that were
like really big efforts in the game, right?
Like the looking glass, 
rendering feature, the mimic ability.
And then like the glue gun
was another really big one.
It was like a tremendous amount of game
design and engineering and art effort by
the team. And we had lots of
different incarnations of it.
And part of it was like this
isn't a classic action shooter.
So we don't want all of our weapons
to be like machine gun, sniper rifle, rocket.
And also fictionally, this is a space station, 
like a science research based station.
So it's not, there wouldn't be rocket
launchers aboard the space station.
A lot of our tools need to come from
like research science background, right?
That's like the narrative meaning behind
it. So this was like, okay, well,
why did this, why does this exist? Well,
it was like a tool they use to
subdue the aliens, right? The Typhon.
But it went through lots of
incarnations, a lot of iterations.
Like at one point it was more like a
stream, right? You know what I mean?
It would, it would make like a
sticky surface. At another point,
it was like almost like it fired a
beanbag, like less frequently, like,
and the beanbag would explode like popcorn.
And then eventually we
settled on what we have now,
which is kind of like a stream,
like a fast moving stream of the balls
that all merge together into big gloopy
structures. You know, there were some
concessions we had to make 'cause,
for scope and because of the technology
we were using, we're like, you know,
initially we had like, you can
make bridges across gaps. 
And we could have probably
eventually figured that out,
but we had to cut it off
eventually, you know.
Going down that path was not performing
well, and it had way too many bugs.
And so we settled on like, well, you
can, you can stick it to surfaces,
but you can't, like you can't
build like 3D shapes out of it.
SUSAN: The glue gun was tough because it was 
foam that turned into a hardened substance.
So it needed to both be this thing that could
 suppress movement on the AI that was fluid,
but then also could turn
into a hard walkable surface,
but also could be shattered, and
destroyed, and removed out of the game.
And it was just this kind of compounding,
like any one of these things
would be difficult enough,
but let's combine five of
them. And yet the thing is,
and what helps the producers not lose
our minds when things like this land in
our lap is that the glue gun ultimately
became one of the coolest things in
Prey. And, you know, we can't
deny it worked out in the end,
even if we all pulled out a lot of our
hair trying to get it there. Because of
the devotion that we have to simulation
and the play your own way mentality,
it leads to a lot of extra work
for one thing that's never intended.
And sometimes because we put something
 in the game, and it seems like a
really cool idea, and production's
all on board with it. Yeah!
That seems like a really great idea.
But then it spawns something else
that is also an incredibly cool idea,
but that we hadn't even considered
trying to find time in the schedule to
support, but we all want it.
So there's a lot of shell game shuffling around
 that goes on in production at Arkane.
I think because that is so inherent
in our DNA and how we make our games,
we tend to do impossible things.
The, uh, the joke that I had leading into 
this game with Ricardo and Harvey
was like, okay, for the next game, let's just choose 
one impossible thing that we're going to do
instead of like five, like we did 
last time. Where we got this idea,
and it seemed amazing and cool, 
and we implemented it,
and it still seemed amazing and cool. 
And then we hit something,
but we're so in love with the idea of
it being in the game that we're like
determined to actually make it work.
ANDREW: Before it was the glue gun,
it was the amber gun for a little while
because the stuff that it shot out was
supposed to solidify into amber. 
So it went through many revisions
on what its capabilities were and what
the design approach was just based on
what we could figure out, what it
could, what it could possibly do.
AMBER: We had cases where you could shoot 
the glue gun, and before the foam kind of
solidified, project yourself
through the environment.
Even after the game had gone live,
players had found an exploit that
we had to fix where you could do that.
And I think some speedrunners still use it.
Like they use like the earlier version
of the game in order to like speedrun
through the game, using that exploit.
RICARDO: There's a locked office that you're 
not supposed to be able to get into in the
demo. It doesn't break anything if you
get into it, but like somebody, 
the window has like these slats, and somebody 
shot the glue gun through the slat.
So there was a pile of glue in the
office, and then they got the Nerf gun and
shot a bullet, bounced it off the glue ball, and it 
hit the button that's on the back of the door
that you're not supposed to be able 
to access. And then the door opened.
And we were just like, whoa, like how 
many shots did that take, you know,
for that person to pull that off? But they did it.
- We would do like cycle testing.
So you write test plans that
focus on certain elements,
like you mentioned, maybe NPC types.
And then you go through like a test
sweep that focuses on that. 
And so you do that cycle
testing over the project course.
So you'll go through all of your powers,
you'll go through all of your
NPC types, environment, et cetera.
But then there's also testers that get
to do more of the creative testing as well.
So then they take combinations and kind
of do like out of the box testing as well.
So it's kind of like scheduling
different people to do different types of
testing in order to try to
cover as much as you can,
because it's impossible to
cover every single scenario.
- Josh, an engineer, and I were talking
down at the food truck one day, and
one of us suggested like,
wouldn't it be cool if the darts could
actually interact with those screens?
I think Josh worked on it for a couple
hours or something, and he had it working.
And we showed it to Ricardo, and it was
like, that was it. It was in the game.
You know, that was a new 
feature that we could work on.
That, I think Arkane is special 
in that way where, you know,
because it is this systems driven game,
because we always try and find multiple
solutions to problems, it allows for,
you know, that creative freedom to,
you know, for someone to just come
up with an idea and try it out.
And then it's, you know, a feature
that like, they are just some puzzles,
some rooms that are hard to get
into, unless you have the dart,
the toy gun, and you shoot it at
the computer screen to unlock the doors.
INTERVIEWER: And then your team has to 
shoot a dart at every screen in the game.
- Absolutely.
And then try to find cases where potentially
 that's not the best scenario that
we hadn't accounted for so that you're
not getting early access to something
that you're not supposed to.
- You're welcome.
[LAUGHING]
- Yeah, so one of the best things about Prey
 for me was that I was not involved in it at
all, which means that somebody was making
exactly the kind of game that I love,
but I didn't know anything about it.
I couldn't see behind the curtain.
And so once in a while we would
hear something, or Raf would,
we would video conference each other for
an hour or two at a time and just sit
in a conference room and talk.
And so he would explain something that
they were fighting about on Prey or a
direction they were going, or
I'd see a screenshot or whatever.
But it was really when I finished Dishonored 2,
we were halfway through Death of the
Outsider and I thought it was going in a
direction where I could leave. And for
the second half of that, that project,
those guys did brilliantly. I came back halfway through,
 and I was the remote team member
at that point, after four years in France.
And so I got to sit down and just play
Prey every day, and give them my general
impressions, and what excited me, and
what I tried, and what didn't work.
And it was an amazing experience.
I think I did two full playthroughs 
right when I got back,
when the game got to a good place for
that. And it was just like, I was,
for me, it was like, guys,
this is my game of the year.
I didn't have anything to do with it.
So I can say that. It was a truly special
 kind of homage to System Shock
but unique moments in its own right. 
You know, being able to go out in space,
and being able to unlock all the 
different levels and then travel freely.
The glue cannon is amazing.
and being able to unlock all the 
different levels and then travel freely.
The glue cannon is amazing.
The recycler grenade and that whole system
from breaking things down into 
pieces and reconstituting them.
It was a great game in my opinion,
and Mooncrash is even more innovative.
And that's what we had the team
working on as a DLC to Prey
while we were spinning up the
new thing that we're working on.
But so I didn't have anything to
do with Prey except to enjoy it.
DANNY: If you think Prey is a tough
game to explain to somebody,
then you should try elevator pitch,
its breakthrough DLC, Mooncrash,
a roguelike twist on the immersive sim genre,
 where you play as a different character
attempting to escape a base
on the moon, each character
having unique traits that help
the next character escape faster.
It's nothing short of terrific, but being
a DLC for a game that sold modestly,
and a lot of its consumers didn't 
actually complete, it's flown tragically
under the radar for years.
SUSAN: After we finished Prey, we had a 
little internal game jam with the teams.
We took a couple of weeks
and we just said like, hey,
put yourself into groups and come
up with ideas. Take what we built,
take the tool set, and come up with
some new and crazy ideas, and see
what happens. And so there
are a number of things in
Mooncrash that actually resulted from
internal game jam ideas that people came
up with. It's an opportunity to do, to
try things that are a little different.
And when you finish a game after
years and years of developing a game,
you wanted the team to have
motivation and not, okay.
Let's keep doing the same thing that we've
been doing for the last four years of
our lives. Like you kind of want to
do a little bit of a twist to that.
'Cause we're tired at that point. It
takes a lot out of you at the very end.
- Mooncrash was like probably one of 
the most fun projects ever for me personally,
because one of the things we like to do 
with DLC is like experiment a little bit, right?
And so we did that with some of the Knife 
of Dunwall and Brigmore Witches stuff,
but we went even further with Mooncrash.
'Cause like a bunch of us on the team are
fans of roguelikes, you know,
things like Dead Cells and Rogue Legacy,
dozens of really great roguelikes.
Spelunky, I can appreciate those types
of games, but I'm not very good at them.
And so they frustrate
me because, you know,
I'm like I started all the way over
here. So I like games that have a,
a meta progression layer to them.
RICH: So a lot of it was, a lot of it was scope. 
We had a very sort of tight window to do
something, but we wanted to do something
kind of experimental and interesting 
because it was a relatively low
risk project. So we can, we could
kind of flex a bit and see what we,
what we wanted to do. And so the,
the roguelike thing came up very early
on and we kind of, that, it just persisted.
And so we decided to go with that.
RICARDO: And we had a bunch of game
 features in Prey originally that were cut
as it always is the case in game development,
 like dynamic hazards. You know,
we wanted the space station to mutate
even more as you play through the game,
but we just didn't have
time to do all that stuff.
But a lot of those ideas still
existed. And we were like,
let's make a roguelike version of this
game, and let's bring back some of those
things that we were interested in.
But then we had to figure out like a
narrative framework to hold all of that.
That wasn't just like a meadow. Like
you're just playing the game again.
You know?
So we came up with the conceit of
like the KASMA spy who was like,
you know, orbiting the moon
and spying on the moon base.
You're a hacker who has all this
data that allows him to create a
simulation of a moon base of
events that actually transpired.
And you get to go,
you get to live inside that simulation
and play out different possibilities.
The more successful you are while you're
in the simulation at collecting bits of
information and unlocking things, the
more the simulation spaces open up, right?
So the more characters get unlocked,
the more levels you can visit, and the
more abilities you have access to until
eventually everything is opened up and
you figured out all the secrets, right?
You've unlocked every character,
you know what happened to every single 
one of them. But then on top of all of that,
there's a story of you, the hacker in the satellite 
and why you're hacking into the moon base in the
first place and what your fate is. 
And then you get to play that out too.
Remember how I was like talking about how 
on Prey, like I think we had too many powers?
Mooncrash provided I think
an elegant solution to that,
because it took the powers and allowed
us to break them down into more
manageable pieces for 
players to deal with, right?
So like the so-called janitor
had this subset of the powers,
and so she felt very distinct
from the engineer character
who had this other subset of power.
And even though that was a subset,
there was still some variation in play in there. 
Yeah, so each one of those represented
a different way to play the game,
but also a different narrative arc.
It's hard to say that anything is
unique because something, you know,
there's always some precursor, you can 
point to that, well, that was kind of like that.
But it is the first time in my experience
that I've seen a video game where,
or a roguelike specifically where 
like, since you're running through
the same simulation with multiple
 heroes, multiple characters,
like what the first character did
impacts what the second character did.
And I think that was a pretty cool feature.
Until you learn that you can end up
screwing yourself,
but once you know that you can make
some pretty cool strategies, you know.
You can go, I want to come through
 with the hacker first and hack
all the doors open and shut things down
so that when the hacker dies and the
soldier has to come
through, they can, you know,
breeze through this part of the game.
RICH: You can really play it a 
lot with different play styles.
And so that goes into that sort of pushing
people just outside of their comfort zone.
So we took the uber set of Morgan powers 
and carved them off into different little
branches catering to different
sort of specific play styles.
So this is the hacker person. This is
the sneaky person. This is the combat,
you know, person or whatever.
And then rolling that into this sort of
repeating sort of framework where 
you can experiment over and over again.
KAREN: Obviously we wanted to do some reuse, 
and via it being a TranStar facility, we were,
that was kind of like a narrative
way to be able to use some of it.
But we also wanted, you know,
one thing about Arkane that I really love is 
that we come up with a history for things.
So, you know, that we backed up, 
even though you don't see it in the game,
we came up with a history, and how the
moon base was established, and, you know,
the first people that got
there, and how it developed,
and then when TranStar came over.
- When you're making a new IP in particular, 
and you're trying to like find out everything
at the same time that you're building it,
 that can be very stressful.
By the time you get around
to the DLC, yes. You know,
you know what all the bits and pieces can do,
and there's fun in reconfiguring
them in new and unique ways that
you didn't get to try the first time.
DANNY: If it wasn't obvious
enough, I really love Prey.
And if you've gotten this
far and never completed it,
then this is probably the right
time to stop and give it a go.
Because while Prey didn't set the world on fire 
or win many awards or change gaming forever,
you may be one of the people who
consider it a modern classic.
And another reason is that we're
just about to spoil the ending.
You've been warned.
RICARDO: I'm pretty proud of how well the 
narrative story we were telling meshed with
the game that you were
playing. You know what I mean?
It was like pretty well
meshed together. And even the,
even the controversial ending scene, 
which was a hail Mary at the very end.
INTERVIEWER: Was it? Why was it controversial?
- The whole game. This is a spoiler. So turn your 
ears off if you don't want to know this.
But like, you know, you, the entire
game was a kind of simulation,
but it wasn't the kind, that's, it's
all a dream, that it's meaningless.
It actually mattered because the whole
point was they were trying to figure out
how to bridge the gap between humanity
and these, you know, these new,
this new alien species. And you realize, oh my god, 
I was one of these things the whole time. 
And I think some people had a negative
reaction because, you know, to them it felt like
nothing I did mattered. But I
think it mattered very much so.
And I loved the idea of all the people
kind of judging you. Like the whole,
the game is about empathy, right?
At least that's my, my take.
So like the, the game at the end
is just all the people are like,
how did you treat, like that,
the most important thing was how did you
treat all the people that you met along
the way? You know, it's the trolley
problem. It's the game. Yeah.
- And, you know, the reviews back then
 were actually a little mixed as well,
which maybe was part of the
problem, you know, and it's so hard.
It's just, this is a very hard world.
It's a rough world where
people will spend three,
four years on something for all
their passion. They make it, frankly.
I mean, we see the result, praise a
great game, except that when it ships,
you might have some bugs. And that's it.
All it takes is one angry journalist.
Sorry, I'm not pointing fingers,
of course. And they give you a four
 out of 10 after having said, oh,
I enjoyed this game so much for 30 hours. 
And then there was this crash
that they could not, not allow me to keep playing.
 Four out of 10. You know, that hurts.
Prey afforded the Austin side of Arkane
to like come into its own. And like,
we built a whole team and a whole culture
over here. Cause on Dishonored, we were,
we had all that, but we were smaller.
We were like 20 people at max, right?
Prey afforded us an opportunity
to grow, grow the team,
grow our own culture here,
and do something on our own.
- There's this shared ideal for games, 
and that design philosophy that is
integral to Arkane games that
makes it an exciting place to work.
You have all these systems
that are interacting.
You end up talking to a lot of people
that you might not talk to in an
environment where your responsibilities
are a lot more specialized.
For me, I think it's like the family feeling
 that I get from all of my fellow coworkers.
I think that Arkane is a very tight knit
group, and we all get along very well.
And it kind of fosters that 
collaborative environment.
- We were also building the
team in Austin back then.
So it's been very hard, and
there's been, you know,
there's been some hiccups on the way,
but ultimately everybody was very
collaborative and did their best, and
it worked out. And that's what
matters. It's a lot of miracles
back-to-back to make any, to
make a game that is decent.
Because it's such a big game,
we're talking AAA budgets, and it's hard
to make a game with so much integrity
and so much risks at that kind of budget.
There's been a lot of improvisation. 
There's been a lot of risks that were taken,
and tried them until the end, frankly.
And the result is very, very 
close to something that
I mean, I would love to play that game if it was
 not something that I worked on, right?
It was not, it was not such a great 
commercial success.
Why? I don't know.
DANNY: There's a name for this, a game that people
 really love, keep talking about for years,
maybe it didn't sell that much. I think
they're called cult classics, right?
I think you made one of those.
- That's right. Yeah. And I'm fine with that.
I'll take that. You know, as a kid,
I just wanted to make those,
I wanted to make those games.
RICARDO: You know, anytime we take a new effort,
we try to remain true to like
our core spiritual values, right?
Like we believe in building
super deep, interesting worlds.
And we believe in giving players like
the ability to be creative and improvise,
you know, and own the play
experience as much as possible.
Those are like our two tenants. But
so we try to be true to that always,
but we also want to do some new
things, right? So Mooncrash is
evidence of that, right?
We're like, let's put some,
let's put some roguelike into
this stew and see what happens.
And so looking to the future, 
you know, that's our plan.
DANNY: Awesome. Can't wait to play whatever it is.
- Yeah. Me too.
[MUSIC PLAYING: WEIRD WOLVES - "REALIZATION"]