[Jeremy] Something I've always loved
about roguelikes and roguelites 
is how they reveal the way that gameplay loops create story.
Every run is like its own hero's journey,
a little slice of personal mythology.
A descent into danger through which
the hero gathers the skills
that they'll need to one day triumph,
and returns home having changed.
In "The Hero With A Thousand Faces",
mythologist Joseph Campbell writes:
"It would not be too much to say that myth is the secret opening 
through which the inexhaustible energies of the cosmos pour.
Religions, philosophies, arts, prime
discoveries in science and technology, 
the very dreams that blister sleep, boil up 
from the basic, magic ring of myth."
And so, appropriately, this is a story that begins where it ends, 
or I guess it might end where it begins.
With a four-man team in Russia
trying to venture into the dark woods 
beyond clearly defined lines of genre
to discover something great in the unknown. 
Building the skills along the way
that they'd one day need to create Loop Hero.
When an indie sensation happens overnight
it's easy to assume that it just came out of nowhere.
But behind every hero is a hero's journey.
and ours begins with the internet's
favorite game jam; Ludum Dare.
But first, if you're not fluent in Russian,
now would be the time to enable captions.
Unless you learn new languages at a weird rate.
Second, who the hell is this guy?
I'm Noclip's camera guy, sometimes editor. 
My name is Jeremy. Hello.
And I made this documentary alongside my friend Danny
because I'm a little obsessed with Loop Hero.
And third, what is Loop Hero?
Well, part of what makes it so interesting is 
the way in which it defies labels.
It's a game full of familiar elements- but reconfigured in a way you might not expect.
Loop Hero is an endless RPG that takes inspiration
from clickers and zero-player games:
games that are capable of playing themselves 
with minimal or no input from the player.
In Loop Hero, your role isn't fighting or questing 
like it would be in a conventional RPG.
Instead you're shaping the world around the hero.
Both the enemies he encounters 
as well as the boons he receives.
But unique as it may be, Loop Hero wasn't as far afield for developer Four Quarters as you might imagine,
given their history of interesting creations.
In general, I would say we try
to make different, interesting games.
Perhaps they have a few things in common.
And every time, considering it’s a Game Jam, we stick to a concept of making something simple but spectacular.
We try to make games as unusual as we can.
And to play with genres.
We’ve made games where you are a monster-alien eating
earthlings to the beat of the music.
Other games were about growing plants in the post-apocalypse
or being a pirate and sailing the ocean
in a simple mini-game.
It means, yes, we try to play with genres.
The game jam ratings also vary.
One game took third or second place.
It was the fifth as far as I remember.
Oh, fifth in the end.
But it was placed high in general.
And then some of our games take six hundredth place on all fronts.
It just happens. It’s not that we worked hard on one game,
and slacked off on another.
[JEREMY] Four Quarters' old games are all fun in their own right, 
but collectively, they're especially interesting
as a test bed for the ideas that would
 one day make Loop Hero great.
The zero-player-game approach in some, 
stressful randomness in others,
a mixture of bleak minimalism and vibrant pixel art.
But one entry in particular stands out from the rest in 
this regard, and I think it'll be obvious why...
Okay, so.
The idea was born from thinking of zero-player games,
as well as clickers.
It means, how to design a game that minimally depends on the player 
and make it interesting.
How to shape it? For example, by introducing an increasing progression 
of difficulty like in a clicker.
And from there the concept of the road with a walking character was born.
He walks while everything becomes harder 
and the world becomes bigger through the efforts of the player.
This concept evolved and grew further, but that happened
after Ludum Dare - so after the period you asked about...
Right, we didn’t enter Ludum Dare with this idea, I should clarify.
Because when we discussed the original concept,
we weren’t planning on creating it yet.
But when we joined that Ludum Dare in December,
the topic was “Start with nothing”.
And while we had some ideas for it,
they were not that interesting.
Then we remembered this six-month old conversation.
And we thought: “Oh, that fits well! This small man
is starting from nothing. Let’s try this one.”
So no, we don’t usually join Ludum with a prepared idea.
This is an exception when we used an existing concept.
But only the concept - the rest of the game was made during Ludum.
Not very successfully though, but that’s a different story.
From the technical point of view, it was not hard at all
to make a game with no specific genre,
because we were constantly making games of a completely
different genre spectrum for Ludum Dare.
Platformers, quests, Russian roulette RPG
A rhythm game, a building game. A lot of things.
So when a new idea came up, we weren’t stuck thinking about
how to make cards drop.
For us it was simply “Okay, that’s a new mechanic.
It exists already. We've made it before.”
Talking about development itself, there are elements
that we have taken from other genres.
The inventory system and item-building are similar
to games like Diablo and others.
There’s a somewhat rogue-lite system
that is quite similar to other rogue-lite games.
There’s no concrete example or a reference point,
but we were taking general genre stuff from here and there.
But we didn’t think about how consumers would look at this.
All in all, it was just hard to present the game
because we couldn’t explain it on the fly or say...
“It’s like Hades, but this thing is different” or
“It’s like Hollow Knight, but...”
And even explaining the game with trailers was tricky,
because people watching our first trailers 
did not understand what the game was about.
Only when it became possible to play the demo
people started to be interested in it.
That’s an interesting question, to be honest.
Because we released the game after Ludum Dare as a demo
and just watched players reactions.
Many players said we should make something large-scale
from the demo because they wanted more.
The funniest thing is even after the release people are still asking us for more and more.
It seems like it will go on forever.
At a glace LooPatHerO may look 
startlingly similar to Loop Hero
and I recommend you play it 
because it's kind of freaky how similar it is.
But, there's an extra twist to this story.
If you check Finlal's blog entry for the 
Ludum Dare they entered this into
the game wasn't actually complete in time for the contest.
The entry reads;
"Unfortunately, this time we have run out of time, 
and the game does not really work
We made sprites, animations, hud, music, sounds, 
but the rpg system turned out to be quite complex stuff,
and we did not manage to bring it into working condition.
So we failed this time"
Though, it's worth noting that this version had a gun, 
and that's kind of hilarious.
But even once LooPatHerO was fixed,
other than the basic mechanics
and some of the world-building,
everything else that makes Loop Hero great was still missing. 
There was no story, no progression,
 just a single, endlessly looping quest.
A major change is the camp. We simply didn’t have it.
Dima said at some point: “Guys, I have an idea of how to make a 100-hour game from a 30-minute game. Let’s add a camp.
It can be built, this is how we can entertain people.”
Almost everything except the basic gameplay cycle
was created after the demo.
In the demo we had walking in circles, cards dropping,
item dropping and that's it.
Everything else is add-ons that we came up with afterwards.
As a mechanic, [the camp] gave us indirect upgrading.
The character doesn’t have something,
so we compensate for that with the buildings.
We don’t have armor, so we build a smith
and now we have armor and weapons.
We don’t have potions, so we build a herbalist’s hut and so on.
So it plays the role of consistent character upgrades
in a framework of inconsistent runs
where you start with nothing.
Now the tiles transform based on their combination and location 
 but we didn't have this in the original version.
I’m not sure how it started — we probably just did it for fun.
But later it became a convenient punishment tool for players
trying to come up with obvious exploits.
Here is an example. We have a Mountain Peak.
There are Rocks and Mountains — and the closer you put them
to each other, the more effective they are.
But when you place a three-by-three square of those Rocks and Mountains,
they become a Mountain Peak which spawns a new enemy.
You see, the player tried to use it as a benefit,
but now the player is punished.
This is an attempt of the game to react to the player’s actions.
And bring variety.
The very first transformation we created was adding
vampire villages —  “Count's Lands”.
The idea was to place a Vampire Mansion close to a Village.
Then vampires invade the village, wreak havoc, ghouls appear in the village,
and after three circles the village turns into a prosperous one 
because it is under the vampire's protection.
It was mostly made for fun. Because it’s cool and
because it refers to dialogue with a vampire.
In the beginning, there were no perks in the game.
Not for defeating the bosses, or for experience.
They appeared somewhere in summer, meaning, in the middle of development
when all the other systems were more or less formed.
But we thought that the runs themselves were quite similar,
considering you always have the same items and the same attributes.
But the perk system made it possible to make the runs very different depending on what perks dropped.
Initially, there was the same amount of class perks as there are now.
But in the fall, we noticed that defeating the boss only gave resources,
and we should make the victory more rewarding.
So we got an idea of adding some more interesting perks
that could be obtained by defeating bosses.
That’s how we got 15 more perks that are not tied to a specific class.
They are more universal and make your boss' defeats more rewarding.
[JEREMY] With the addition of each of these ideas, 
LooPatHerO grew and grew until it became Loop Hero. 
But even with the abundance of clever 
mechanics and innovative ideas
coming from each of the team members, 
nobody makes games in a vacuum.
So, where do you draw inspiration from when you're making 
a game that intentionally goes against the norm?
And what are the challenges 
that emerge from this approach?
I don’t know, that’s a very weird question
because it’s a quite cliche grimdark fantasy.
If you’re asking specifically about my work,
I can't do anything else, to be honest.
Let me draw anything — and I will draw exactly this.
So it wasn’t our conscious choice, we were just going with the flow in this case.
I can also say that
I was strongly inspired by Disciples 2
and I try to actively imitate this style.
I think that lore initially appeared as an attempt to explain
and justify what was going on.
Plus, it’s just some kind of fantasy.
I don’t know how people usually write lore.
In the end everyone contributed to it,
and added something of their own.
Well, yes.
Tell us about the very beginning, when you were writing the first ones.
How you came up with the road, the memories and so on.
Oh yes, okay.
It was an attempt to ask myself a question about what I saw in the game, and answer how it is all possible.
Why does the game start with us only having a road and the character that walks along it? Where is everyone?
Okay, let’s say there was an apocalypse and everything disappeared.
Why can I place some kind of cards on the road and restore the land?
Well, let’s imagine we are remembering those lands
and that’s why they reappear.
So the lore was formed by answering the questions we were asking ourselves.
The Steam demo really helped us. We were closely watching 
how people played it during the Steam Game Festival.
And there are two things we introduced
in the very last stages of development.
A few days before release,
we noticed people were abusing the use of Villages.
The Villages were so helpful, that people played them indiscriminately. And it was working.
This introduced a rather large imbalance, so we thought:
“Okay, we should add something”.
We don't like to delete things,
we prefer to add something on top to counter.
That’s how the Bandit Camps appeared, 
which now create trouble for those who place many Villages.
The second thing we noticed was people increasing
the attack speed with no strategy.
It was possible to put everything into the
attack speed as a safe bet.
That’s how the stamina bar was created, which counters it.
And there were a couple more small things.
After the release, surprisingly, people have not
yet found some things that would break the game,
but in general, we observe what’s happening
and what players uncover.
And our hero's efforts did not go unrecognized. 
In fact the game was an overnight sensation
and sold more than half-a-million copies in its first week alone.
This is, by any measure, a massive triumph.
Especially for a four-man team.
But victory doesn't come without a cost. 
Especially when you're a four-man team.
"When the hero-quest has been accomplished,
the adventurer still must return.
the hero shall now begin the labor of 
bringing the runes of wisdom,
the Golden Fleece - back into the kingdom of humanity.
But the responsibility has frequently been refused.
Numerous indeed are the heroes 
fabled to have taken up residence
forever in the blessed isle of the Goddess."
And they didn't even have to deal with bug reports...
We didn’t expect [the success]
and we honestly weren’t ready for it.
One example is that the game
was released quite polished
but when 40-50 thousand people
play your game at the same time
hundreds of people notice a bug that only 1% of players have.
It’s a lot of bug-reporting.
So the first days of the release our programmers
Dmitry Lagutov and Finlal were busy
fixing bugs around the clock.
Me and Deceiver were going through bug-reports trying to find
more things and help with testing.
It was quite stressful and we weren’t ready for this.
Another example is that we even get messages like “Oh, you didn’t answer my question?
I will post a negative review on Steam because you are arrogant freaks that don’t respond to every question.”
And this was quite unpleasant,
because we can’t even physically read them all.
So that was additional pressure, let’s put it that way.
But now everything is more or less going back to normal,
we try to read less of everything that has been written
and focus on making new updates.
No.
No, not at all.
We will now think three times before each Ludum Dare.
Those Ludum Dares take a lot of effort and we’re
not physically ready to participate in them right now.
And we don’t want to postpone the next patch, 
because there is a feeling that at some point it may be too late.
Meaning, people want more content, and it’s better to put our energy into improving the game the best we can
rather than doing new things, at least for now.
At some point, we may get tired of the game.
But for now…
We are only thinking of Loop Hero.