(keyboard clicks) 
Hey, how you doin'?
Danny here from Noclip with a kind of a different type of video than we're used to doing,
one that's really exciting as you've probably seen from the thumbnail and the name on the video.
But one that I think that we need to give critical context to
and context is basically the most important thing
about this video and why we're able to publish it.
So, over the years Noclip has uncovered games that were canceled,
we've uncovered game footage
of these games and we've been really lucky in many instances to show off
pretty big chunks of these games
To sort of explain and give historical context for how far they were, 
why they got canceled, all that type of stuff.
Doing this work involves a lot of work you don't see, it involves a lot of like
you know, sort of politics, and making sure all the stakeholders involved
are comfortable with what's about to be shown.
Which is why we don't just dump all the gameplay on the internet.
We need to make sure that everyones happy and we also need to provide some
sort of context for what you are about to see, because the thing about canceled games it that sometimes
when you see the footage of them they can create more questions than they answer.
and we always want people when they've watched one of our documentaries
to feel like they've gotten all of the answers.
So, I guess this is the sort of opposite side of that coin where
while we edit these docs and we're sort of economical in what we show
ultimately Noclip's mission is to preserve
video game history and to tell as much of it as possible
and we don't want to just sit on this gameplay.
It's not just for us, it's for everyone.
And now it's been a couple of years since our documentary on Arkane Studios where we first
showed off gameplay of this canceled, unreleased, unfinished
Half-Life game that Arkane Studios were working on.
And we think it's time to show the rest of the gameplay that we recorded which was about an hour.
That said, we don't want to put it up without critical context,
because that might create more questions than it answers.
So, that's what this video is going to be - it's a gameplay showcase where we're going to show
the footage that we got without any watermarks or without any commentary or any of that sort of stuff.
But we're gonna take breaks in between the footage,
so that your little, sort of, Irish helper can pop up here
and give you not just critical context for the gameplay but also
added information because while I was playing I was sitting down with the Art Director
for Arkane Lyon - Sébastien Mitton.
Who worked on the project and he was telling me lots of interesting factoids
and development stories about it as well.
That's what this is gonna be, but before we get into that,
lets answer the 2 most important questions
about this video: What is it you're going to see? and how did we get this footage?
In early 2020 we travelled to Lyon, France as part of a documentary covering the history of Arkane Studios.
Arkane are most known for the Dishonored franchise, Prey, and most recently Deathloop.
But in our documentary we also explored the design of 3 unreleased games.
The Crossing, LMNO, and Ravenholm - to learn more about these games
and to get a better understanding of why none of them were released
we recommend checking out our full documentary - link in the description below.
And like all our videos the documentary has chapter markers so if you want
you can just skip ahead to the game you want to see.
Once again, our sincere thanks to Arkane, Bethesda, and Valve
for helping us to tell the story of these unreleased games.
The build you are about to see had been put together near the end of development
to try and show Valve the progress the team at Arkane had made.
It's this footage of my playthrough that you are going to see.
We'll get into specifics a little bit later but it's important to understand that everything you're about to see
is from an incomplete game
Meaning that a lot of stuff is going to be missing and even much of the content that's here
is either an early pass or placeholder.
So, elements like art, animations, gameplay, level design, even voice work
were likely to go through further changes.
Look the most important thing to remember is that this gameplay was not created
with public consumption as the goal, this isn't a trailer, it's not an official gameplay reveal,
this is just some footage we pulled from an in-development title.
So, the frame rate is going to be a little bit rough from time to time,
and it's also fair to say that elements of the story
settings, and characters were not necessarily set-in-stone either.
Arkane had been given free creative reign in these areas by Valve.
And ultimately the game was canceled before any of these elements were finalized.
Also, the gameplay was captured via Shadowplay in 1080p at 60 frames per second
but we've decided to render and upload this video in 4K to help retain as much quality
as possible during Youtube's compression.
And gentle reminder for the few of you who are a little bit confused
as to why all the game text is in French, its because the developers are based in France.
Okay, that's enough of an introduction, are you excited?
I was when I got to play it.
I'm excited for you all to see it finally see it, let's jump into the introduction to Ravenholm
with everyone's favorite Half-Life 2 priest - Father Grigori.
(Father Grigori) So much violence here now, I regret you have become part of it
and yet I confess, I am gladdened by your company.
Too much solitude is not good for a man who like myself
wishes only to serve but I have been good for nothing of late.
My soul filled with evil and like this town it must be purged.
Now, I cannot claim great wisdom but through much trial and error I have found a way to immunize myself
against the demons neurotoxins.
Homeopathic principles you'll understand.
Eeeeuuurggghhhh.
We have time for a quick bite, supping on nourishment quite plentiful in Ravenholm.
Would that it were otherwise.
If one is sufficiently famished, the white meat is tolerable.
I will make no comparisons to poultry.
 Ha! There you are.
Kill your concern, I'm quite immune to their bite.
These I hardly even notice them.
Now as for the beacon I will try to provide some illumination.
I have prayed for assistance with this particular task and tonight my prayers were answered.
But this has ceased being about them.
Truth be told brother, I care for myself and now for you as well, the beacon exits to send out a signal
It will be a guiding light to all who have eyes to see.
No time, we are safe here no longer.
They have surrounded us like water, they have seized away our day.
Get in that hole brother, don't wait for me, I will find you after dealing with these.
Okay, a couple of notes on that, the gameplay you just saw was actually recorded by Sébastien Mitton when I did the original recording
with Shadowplay on-site, there was no gameplay audio so he went back an recorded that for me.
The rest of the gameplay you are about to see was played by me, so if you have any problems with it
feel free to hit me up on Twitter I guess.
So, a couple of things there, first of all this game wouldn't have starred Gordon Freeman.
I know the introductory animation of him getting up had the HEV suit
but they said it was going to be a completely different character.
At the end of the gameplay section that you are about to see though,
there is something from Half-Life 2, something that was
unused, Viktor Antonov who was the Art Director on Half-Life 2, he's worked with Arkane a bunch,
he's friends with Sébastien Mitton, a bunch of the folks at Arkane.
He had a concept for Half-Life 2 which this sort of 'windmill' structure,
which never actually got used in Half-Life 2 so they used it in Ravenholm.
You'll see Grigori sort of tinkering with it at the end of the next section.
But the biggest thing to look at in this gameplay section is the introduction of the 
sort of melee and physics combat system they have here.
Arkane made 2006's 'Dark Messiah of Might & Magic' which was a game where you could
use spells and use melee attacks to stagger enemies and knock them off cliffs and stuff like that.
And they basically pulled that into this because that game was also developed in Source.
So, keep an eye out for that, there's lots of instances where the zombies who are
running towards you get knocked into spikes,
knocked over railings, it's pretty cool, and of course a lot of this stuff is placeholder
But even so it looks pretty neat for as far along as the game was.
Alright, enough talking, here's the next gameplay section.

(Father Grigori) Praise the light that you have survived.
Some fresh air is just ahead, in the yard you will see
some of my mechanisms for restoring power.
(Father Grigori) Here, isn't it lovely?
Behold brother, this generator will power my electrical snares as well as the signal from the beacon.
Be very careful, there's more than 100,000 volts, you know those volts will jump.
Reaching the east wing, likely a breaker I missed
I'll need your help finding it, once you throw the switch,
power in the east wing will be restored and we can proceed.
Go that way brother, I have a radio that will patch me in to the hospital's intercom system,
I will try to keep you company along the way.
Okay, we head into the Hospital facility - it's got an asylum and a lab in it.
A couple of notes on this, first of all Sébastien said that the team went to great lenghts to make sure that there was sort of
architectural variety in this area.
So, while the facility we go into right now
is going to be in the sort of 60s style with dropped ceilings and stuff like that.
In later chapters you spend some time in a 19th century, sort of, original facade of the building.
And he said yea it was important to basically give it a little bit of texture so it didn't feel like
you were corridor crawling through the same type of areas for a long period of time.
But the showstopper, in this section, is the introduction of Arkane's really remarkable electricity gameplay.
It's gonna escalate as we get through the chapter, so this is pretty basic stuff
but once you see it, especially if you haven't seen our documentary and this is the first time you're seeing it
it's pretty special, and cool, and fun, so enjoy.

(Father Grigori) Are you inside the hospital brother?
Perhaps not.
I cannot hear you, but maybe my voice will give you some comfort.

(Father Grigori) And I am at work on the roof brother, stringing cables.
You should be nearing the place where the power can be restored to the east wing.

(Father Grigori) Praise the light brother! You did it!
Electricity flows into the east wing! I can see the lights from here.
There must be a breach deep in the hospital basement.
You'll have to cross the entire east wing then drop into the basement.
It'll be a long journey brother, I will do my best to keep up your morale.

(Danny) Okay, we move ahead onto the next chapter of the game titled 'Swarming'.
Just a quick couple of notes here. First of all you may have heard some new music.
Sébastien said that they did actually compose an original score for this game, so much of that stuff
is here and I think it's the first time some of its ever been heard which I think is pretty cool.
On top of that there's a couple of interesting mechanical innovations here.
It's not in this build but Sébastien said that later builds of the game
had it so that when the zombies were pinned to the wall or pinned to the floor
that they could pull their arms out of their sockets and keep chasing after you, 
or presumably pull their feet off of the bolts when they were wedged to the floor.
Which is pretty cool, and there's another element of the electronic play which you should keep an eye out for.
So, other objects in the world that are metallic are able to conduct the electricity.
And there's lots of that sort of, gameplay and gunplay happening here.
Obviously I'm only able to play the game through once, this section.
So, keep an eye out for other ways I might have been able to complete some of the puzzles.
(Father Grigori) Brother! You are still alive, I just saw you pass the closed circuit camera there.
Yes, be careful, I can see the area ahead is riddled with cracks, the creatures are pouring in ahead of you.
Try to seal them out as best you can, I feel the main breach is even farther ahead.
(Father Grigori) Damn these injection, a small price to pay for immunity from the demons toxins
Once you have sealed the breach and helped me direct power to Ravenholm
(Father Grigori) Hmm, the transformer is problematic, I admit that I am not an expert in this kind of machinery, still I think it should be working soon.
I hope your progress towards the breach is not too disheartening.
(Danny) This next section of the game 'Pitch Black' take place in the 19th century part of the facility.
And introduces a couple of interesting things, 
there's a new acid spitting zombie
Which sort of works in cahoots with the regular zombies
to create more dynamic gameplay encounters.
and these, I think they're apes or monkeys - sorry biologists - that are really smart.
So, I guess in the story Grigori had been I guess testing on them or experimenting on them with the serum.
And they sort of became feral and quite intelligent.
It may not come across in the gameplay but those weren't scripted sequences when you see them
jumping into the air ducts, they were basically able to evade you by running into air ducts,
and they'd appear out of another one, so they'd try and flank you.
Almost like the assassins in the original Half-Life.
Once you lost them, you didn't really know where they were coming from.
When I was playing, it was really interesting
Another part about this part of the level, is that some of the textures here are unfinished, Sébastien said that there is a lot of placeholder here.
And also because there is no dynamic lighting in Source, or at least this version that they were using some of these areas took a long time to work.
It was pretty intensive, but he said it was worth it because in this chapter
they were really starting to show the horror vibes of later chapters.
And actually one final note, you may have seen Grigori sort of injecting himself again and again with the serum
to try and stop the zombification process happening to him.
I guess ultimately it doesn't work, we got some of this concept are that show that
he sort of ultimately succumbs and turns into what I think might have been the end boss of the game, Sébastien was a little vague about it.
But it sure looks like maybe you'll be fighting Grigori later in the game, anyway enjoy the gameplay.
(Father Grigori) I should warn you, there were experiments.
Laboratory animals you understand.
They were part of the search for a cure, an anti-venom, some of the early tests failed.
You may see the results in there brutal and degenerative glroy.
(Father Grigori) I have encountered these lab bred abominations,
the only advice I can give is that they seem particularly sensitive to light.
(Father Grigori) Hmm, you seem to be closing on the source of evil brother,
I'm sure the breach is just beyond this dark warrens.
(Danny) Okay, so in the next chapter of the game we start to drift into the more unfinished levels.
here we had to use a couple of junction maps to get to the area you are about to see
Where we have a lot of combat, and they introduce a couple of new tools to utilize the electricity in interesting ways.
And then ultimately in ends in a sort of climatic shootout/puzzle
which you'll see right at the end of this gameplay.
But stick around at the end, because there's a couple of things that I want to clear up once we're done here, enjoy!
(Father Grigori) Brother, some of the hospital's wiring is hopelessly ruined, even with the power restored.
You will want to find my charge gun, it is both a powerful tool and a weapon.
(Father Grigori) The mental institution has suffered in much the same way as the rest of the hospital.
I wish to find a direct path here, but alas the way is blocked.
(Father Grigori) Haha! Hello Brother, we meet again at last.
This is the passageway to the lab I've been using.
It holds the serum I need for my injections.
Charge the forklift brother, so that I can access the window.
I will open the door from the far side.
(Upbeat Electro)
(Danny) Okay, that all the footage we have.
Thank you so much for watching this, thank you so much to Arkane, and Bethesda, and Valve.
for being so cool with us sharing this and ultimately making it happen.
Thank you so much to everyone for being so patient in us getting this out.
Game preservation is a huge part of Noclip's mission.
And you know, personally as a Half-Life fan I know meant so much to be able to sit down and play this game.
It's like absolute bucket-list style stuff, and I know there are people
out there who are more passionate about Half-Life than I am
so getting this footage out there means a lot to them, and it means a lot to me.
If you like what we do at Noclip head over to patreon.com/Noclip and help us out and help us fund more documentaries.
And if you don't that fine too, thank you so much for caring about the work we do.
Hit subscribe, like, do all that sort of stuff, who knows what next gameplay showcase we'll have in the future.
Thanks so much for watching, see you next time.
(Upbeat Electro fades to keyboard clicks)